A GA-based Solution to an NP-hard Problem of
Clustering Security
Jianxin Wang,
School of Information,
Beijing Forestry University,
Beijing, China, 100083
wangjxWbjfu.edu.cn

Hongzhou Wang,
Department of Mathematics,
Beijing Institute of Technology
Beijing, China, 100081
wanghongzhouWbit.edu.cn

Abstract-The clustering approach forwarded by Klaus Julisch
is considerably effectual in eliminating false positives and
finding root causes among huge amount of security events. But
the clustering problem was proved to be unfortunately an NPhard one. In this paper, a GA-based algorithm is forwarded,
which is much more effective than the original approximation
algorithm by Julisch. The coding scheme and genetic
operations including selection, crossover, and mutation are
discussed in detail. To validate the quality of the newlyforwarded approach, a tree-version apriori is given, which is
quite time-consuming but able to produce absolutely accurate
solution used for comparison in a feasible period of time. The
results show that the GA-based algorithm is valid and efficient
and can find the optimal clusters that are very similar to the
absolutely accurate ones.
I.

INTRODUCTION

Intrusion detection systems (IDS), as a new and potent
approach to protect computer systems, are increasingly
deployed in response to attacks against enterprise networks
[1]. However, there appears another difficult problem with
the use of IDS: A great number of alarm messages are
generally triggered which turn out to be a burden of the
human operator. It is common for an IDS to trigger
thousands of alarms per day, up to 9900 of which are false
positives [2].
Much work has been done to help human operators
eliminate false positives and finding root causes among the
security events triggered by IDS, as well as those by
firewalls and exchangers. Claus Julisch and his cooperators
used a clustering approach to identify the root cause [3, 4, 5,
6]. His work should be emphasized here with respect to the
effect of their clustering method. In fact, his work was
assimilated into a new computer language, TTT Language,
which is used for security log analysis [7].
In order to extract meaningful clusters from great amount
of security events, Julisch defined an objective distance
between two node vectors in a forest. The distance definition
works well in most cases, except when the human operators
hold intensive biases towards the data newly triggered. A

Geng Zhao,
The Key Laboratory,
Beijing Electronic Scienc&Tech Inst.,
Beijing, China
zg(besti.edu.cn

subjective distance was forwarded to cover the gap between
the nature of the data and what human operators think the
data to be [8].
Theoretically, we can exhaust all the node vectors to
search the best solution to the clustering problem by Julisch,
if given enough time. Unfortunately, the problem is an NPhard one and cannot be solved in a feasible period of time.
The proof about the NP-completeness was specified in his
early work [4].
An expedient algorithm was selected, which is able
produce approximation solution to the clustering problem [4].
As is tested later in this paper, the solutions are generally of
low quality, mostly because the algorithm has no potency of
global optimizing.
Genetic algorithm (GA) is a global optimization
technique that mimics the natural process of evolution in
which the fittest solutions survive after numerous
generations of heredity, variation and natural selection [9].
Usually, an unknown variable in a solution is represented as
a gene, and a solution with many variables is represented as a
chromosome (also called individual). On the other hand,
chromosome can be interpreted as a solution with many
variables. This process is called encoding and decoding.
Fitness is defined to measure the goodness of each individual.
During the optimization process, GA keeps a group of
candidate individuals (solutions) in each generation. Through
genetic operations, such as selection, crossover and mutation,
those individuals with better fitness will be propagated to the
next generation while those with worse fitness will be
eliminated with higher probability. After a number of
generations, the individual with the best fitness among the
last population is chosen as the optimal solution.
The operation of encoding and decoding is usually
different from problem to problem. To get more precise
expression, a chromosome can be segmented into pieces [11].
In the application of GA in this paper, chromosomes are
segmented into pieces for better expression, too, with each
piece representing a node in a tree.

Supported by the National High-Tech Research and Development Plan
of China under Grant No. 2003AA148020

0-7803-9584-0/06/$20.00(2006 IEEE.

Events

2093

Ordinarily, only an approximate solution can be obtained
with GA. Whether it is a best solution or how good it is
cannot be determined. So a best solution is required, in
experiments, to measure the goodness of the solution
obtained with the GA optimization technique. In the
experiments, A tree-version of apriori is built which can
produce best solution to evaluate that obtained with GA.
Apriori is an efficient algorithm for mining association rules
over basket data [10]. Apriori works on the base of the
simple observation: in a relational database, if the number of
records satisfying small set of conditions does not exceed a
given threshold, the number of records satisfying a super set
of conditions can not exceed the threshold, either. With an
apriori, the solution space is generally greatly trimmed and
thus time expense can be usually remarkably reduced.
But the purpose here is to find a best cluster, not
association rules. The apriori is transformed into a treeversion one that can help to search the best cluster so that the
GA-based clustering algorithm can be well evaluated in the
experiments.
II.

x is called a generalization ofy, if Ti contains a one-way path
from x to y (in symbols: xocy). If x is a parent of y, then x
certainly is the generation of y. Finally, x cx is trivially
satisfied. These definitions can be illustrated with the
hierarchical tree in figure l(a). Node "ANY-IP" is a parent
of node "DMZ" while "DMZ" is a child of "ANY-IP". And
"ANY-IP" is a generalization of "ANY-IP", "DMZ", and
"ip1", respectively.
ANY-IP

FIIrvWALL p32Wkt/FTP
ipl

ip2

SiT

1

...

80

ip5

(a)

SN

..

NON-PRIV
1024

1025

...

65535

ANY-DAY-OF-MONTH

ANY-DAY-OF-WEEK

hO ...h23

A. Objective distance
To cluster the events, a distance between two events
must be defined in advance. In practice, distance is easy to
define for numerical attributes, but categories, time, or string
attributes give rise a problem when being defined the
distance of. Unfortunately, alarm messages can contain all of
these attribute types.
In Julisch's work, dissimilarity or distance can be defined
in a uniform manner using hierarchical trees. By way of
illustration, figure 1 shows how hierarchical trees of the IP
address, port, and time attribute can be obtained. The
hierarchical trees play a basic role in the clustering method.
It can be seen in Figure 1 (c, d) that the hierarchical tree of
the attribute time can be constructed in two ways. In fact, the
domain of almost every attribute can be classified this way.
Let Ai be an alarm attribute, alarms are defined as tuples
over the Cartesian product II ,il-ndom(Ai). A tree Ti is called
a hierarchical tree if it is the taxonomy on the elements of
domain(A1). There are 4 examples of taxonomy trees in
figure 1. For two nodes x, y in Ti, x is called a parent of y,
and y a child of x if there is an edge x - y in T. Furthermore,

ip4

ip6 ip7.

PRIVATE
(b)

AWEEKDAY

WEKND

THE CLUSTERING PROBLEM

The great amount of events triggered by an IDS or a
firewall often frustrated their human operators. If the events
are arranged in meaningful clusters, the operators can easily
understand what are happening in the networks and know
what really cause the events to happen. One of the most
important preconditions for clustering is to define distance.
Julisch defined a useful objective distance for measuring the
dissimilarity of two events [3, 4]. The author of this paper
and other co-operators improved the distance definition by
assimilating a subjective distance [8]. Both the objective
distance and the subjective one, together with the clustering
problem definition, will be discussed in this section.

ANY-PORT
EXTERN

MON

hO ...h23

FRI

BEGINNING
1 ... 10

MIDDLE
11 ... 20

ND
21 ...

31

(d)

(c)

Figure 1. Taxonomy of several kinds of attributes

Based on the definition "generalization", the distance
between two nodes in a hierarchical tree can be defined. The
distance between x and y is the number of edges between x
andy, if x is a generation of y, or if y is a generation of x. But
the distance between two nodes is undefined if the
generalization-specification relationship does not exist
between them.
A vector, every element of which is a node from the
corresponding hierarchical tree, is also called an alarm. It is
different from an ordinary alarm, for its elements are
probably not taken from its attribute domain. A cover of a set
of alarms (y1, y2,
, Yn) is an alarm x, which is a
generalization, but as special as possible, of each alarm in the
set. The example is also from figure 1(a, b). Given a set of 3
alarms (DMZ, 80), (ip3, 80), and (FIREWALL, PRIVATE),
then the cover of the set is (DMZ, PRIVATE). Although the
alarm (ANY-IP, ANY-PORT) is the generalization of each
alarm in the set, it is not the cover of the set because it is not
special enough. So the distance of a set of alarms is defined
as the average distance between its cover alarm and each of
its member alarm. The distance of the alarm set just
mentioned with three members is: (1±+2+1)/3 = 4/3.
B. Subjective distance
Though Julisch's method of clustering with the distance
defined by himself is effectual in eliminating false positives
and forming an event overview, there is an inherent
deficiency in the distance definition. If a generalization
alarm is got as a cluster, it is then the representative of all the
alarms it covers. If the proportion among the alarms does not
match what it is considered to be, then the cluster tortures the

2094

nature of among the events with loss of information to some
extent when presented to human operators.
The subjective distance defines the dissimilarity of the
nature of the data and what human operators think the data to
be [8]. With subjective distance assimilated into the
objective distance, the information that the human operators
obtain from the clusters can be closer to the nature of the
events.

An alarm (each member of which is a node in the
corresponding tree) can be encoded into a chromosome
(made up of pieces each of which is a 0-1 sequence) while a
chromosome can be decoded into an alarm. With the
encoding and decoding operation, a problem of the clustering
domain can be transformed into a problem of the GA domain.
The chromosome and the alarm are mutually interpreted.
They are in GA domain and clustering domain, respectively.
010 0101 001

C. The definition of the clustering problem
The clustering problem forwarded by Claus Julisch can
be now described as: finding a set of alarms in all the alarms
triggered, satisfying that the number of the set members is
greater than or equal to a given threshold whilst the distance
of the set is minimal.
This problem was proved to be NP-complete, which
means that the accurate solution can not be obtained in a
feasible period of time. An approximation algorithm was
given by Julisch [4]. It is described as follows (see figure 2).
Input: a set of events; a threshold T; a set of trees
Output: an alarm H an abstract event
select an arbitrary leaf vector A; H an alarm
while (the number of events that A covers is less
than T) {
select an arbitrary member of A;
replace the member with its direct parent

(a) a chromosome
AO

BO

A_

AI

IA4

A3

IBI

IA5

L6

IB2

C2

IB3

B4

B5

B7

B8

C3 ~C4 ~ C5

(b) the nodes encoded into a chromosome

Figure 3: encoding and decoding

The fitness function is the combination of two factors:
the size of the set that an individual covers and the degree of
compactness of the set. The fitness value will be greater, if
the similarity of the members in the set is more. On the other
hand, given a fixed similarity, the fitness value will be
greater if the size is larger.

Hgeneralization

}

return the alarm A Han approximation solution
Figure 2: an approximation clustering algorithm

The algorithm described above is quite simple. It is likely
that the algorithm leads the solution easily to local minimum,
not the global one.
III. THE GA-BASED ALGORITHM
The approximation algorithm implemented by Julisch is
not capable of global optimization, in which Genetic
algorithm performs well. But first of all, the scheme of
encoding and decoding, and the fitness function must be
defined.
A. Encoding and selection
The purpose of the algorithm is to find an alarm
satisfying a set of conditions. Each member of the alarm is a
node in a tree (see figure 3 (b)). So a chromosome (or an
individual) is made up of n pieces, each piece representing a
node in a tree (see figure 3 (a)).
It should be paid attention to that the length of each piece
of a chromosome is not all the same according to the number
of nodes in the corresponding tree.

B. Crossover and mutation
The operation of crossover makes two chromosomes
exchange a part of each one, with two new chromosomes (of
the next generation) produced. In the GA domain, all the
chromosomes are 0-1 sequences. Two chromosomes of one
generation can mate and produce another two chromosomes
of the next generation. The operation of crossover and
mutation are illustrated in figure 4, where the 3 hierarchical
trees are shown in (c).
010 0101 001
110 1101 001
110 1100 101 (a) crossover 010 0100 101
010 0101 001
A

B

e mutation
= >
(b)
BO

010 0100 001
B

(c) Hierarchical trees

o

Figure 4: crossover and mutation
The crossover operation in this clustering problem is
indicated by figure 4 (a). Two chromosomes (010 0101 001)
and (1 10 1 100 101) mate and two new chromosomes of the
next generation are produced: (1 10 1 101 001) and (010 0100
101). This means, in the clustering problem domain (see

2095

figure 4 (c)), that two alarms (A2, B5, C1) and (A6, B12, C5)
produce another two alarms (A6, B13, C1) and (A2, B4, C5).
We would notice that all the nodes of an individual of
the new generation can be found in the old generation,
except for at most one node changed. In the case shown in
figure 4 (a), only the middle node is new in each derived
individual.
The operation of mutation is simply to turn over one bit
in an individual (a 0-1 sequence), by changing the bit from 1
to 0 or from 0 to 1. As a result, the corresponding alarm is
turned into another alarm, with at most one node changed.
As is shown in figure 4 (b), the alarm (A2, B5, C1) is turned
into another alarm (A2, B5, Cl), which is resulted from the
mutation operation: the individual (010 0101 001) mutates to
another individual (010 0100 001).
As is well known, the probability of crossover is very
large (it is set 100% in the algorithm of this case) while the
probability of mutation is quite small (only 500 here).
C. Local optimization
GA is of great potency in global optimization while it is
not powerful enough in local optimization. The solutions GA
produces are often second-best ones. The strategy in this
clustering case is that GA is used first for global optimization
and the resulted solution is used for local optimization. The
optimization algorithm is quite similar to that specified in
figure 2, except that the node cannot be arbitrary chosen. The
selection operation must maximize the combination of the
size and compactness of the event set the new alarm covers.
To explain how local optimization works, we need a
definition first. A nearest neighbor of an alarm P is another
alarm N, one of whose node is changed into the direct
ancestor or direct offspring of the corresponding node in P,
while all the other nodes of N remain the same as the
corresponding ones of P. In figure 3, for instance, the nearest
neighbors of the alarm P (A2, B5, C1) is (AO, B5, C1), (A4,
B5, Cl), (A2, B2, Cl), and so on. But alarm (A2, BO, Cl) is
not a nearest neighbor of P because Node BO is not the direct
ancestor of Node B5. Neither is the alarm (A4, B2, CI),
because there in it are two nodes that are different from the
corresponding ones in the alarm P. With the definition
nearest neighbor given, the local optimization algorithm is
shown in figure 5.
Input: an alarm P; a threshold T; a set of
trees; a set of events
Output: another alarm
While (P can be optimized further){
select the best one N among the nearest
neighbors of P;
if (N is not better than P) break;
change the content of P into that of N;}
return P;
Figure 5: local optimization algorithm

In the algorithm above, the solution goes to the final
one step by step, and each step guarantees that the resulted
alarm is better than the previous one.

D. The optimization algorithm specification
With both the global optimization and the local
optimization specified, the whole optimization algorithm
seems to be able to easily be obtained. For the first step, GA
is applied and a second-best solution is got. And for the
second step, local optimization technique is used and the
final solution is obtained.
The quality of GA is related to the size of the individual
population, and the number of generations that the individual
spend to evolve. For the clustering problem in this paper, we
set the size of the group to 100 and the number of
generations 50 (the number of generations can also be
controlled by the fitness difference between two adjacent
generations). If the amount of primitive events is very large,
say, more than 150,000, then the size of the group should be
set smaller. Otherwise, the time spent might be markedly
longer.
The best individual is selected after GA is applied, and
this individual is used as an input in the second step of local
optimization. But it is observed that sometimes a worse input
can result in a better output after the application of local
optimization. So several individuals, instead of one, are
selected after GA is applied. Then, local optimization is
applied to each individual, and the best output is selected as
the ultimate solution. This technique guarantees that the
ultimate solution is less likely to be a premature local
extremum. The whole optimization process is shown in
figure 6.
Input: security events, a threshold
Output: a solution
create 100 individuals;
while (the error is not small enough) {
crossover with probability 100%;
mutation with probability 5%;
sorting the individuals;
retain 100 best ones to the next generation;}
choose 20 best individuals of the last generation;
locally optimize every solution of the 20 ones;
select the best result from the 20 output and return it;
Figure 6: Optimization algorithm specification

IV. TREE-VERSION APRIORI
Up to now, most aspects of the newly forwarded
optimization algorithm have been discussed. But its quality
cannot be well validated until an accurate solution is
obtained for comparison, although we can contrast it to the

primitive approximation algorithm. Apriori is deployed here
which is based on a simple but useful principle: if an alarm is
not a solution, then any specification of the alarm can not be

2096

solution, either, simply because a specification covers less
events than the abstract one does and thus can not satisfy the

a

constraint that the threshold specifies.
For example in figure 1, suppose that the threshold is
100. If the alarm (DMZ, PRIVATE, SAT, MIDDLE) covers
90 events, then it is not a qualified alarm. Its specification
(ipi, PRIVATE, SAT, 11) cannot be a qualified alarm, nor
can its specification (FIREWALL, 80, SAT, 11).
This way a lot of candidate alarms will be eliminated so
that the best solution can be obtained in a feasible period of
time. The tree-version apriori can be fulfilled with the aid of
a stack that is able to trim the space to search as much as
possible. But the specification of this tree-version apriori is
omitted here.
V.

strict time-constraint. The second reason lies in the
importance of less dissimilarity. If the events in a cluster are
quite similar, the human operator will get a nice overview of
all the events by looking up the single cluster. This is what
we really want. Compared with cluster quality, the time
aspect is less important, if the time spent does not make the
human operator wait too long, as the tree-version apriori
does in the case shown in table 1.
means no

dissimilarity

r--",-

EXPERIMENTS AND CONCLUSIONS

11,000 events triggered by an IDS is analyzed in the
experiments to test the GA-based algorithm (consisting
global optimization and local optimization. 19 variables of
the events are taken into account and reorganized in trees
(see table 1)
Table 1: comparison among 3 algorithms*

1-

0

Number of trees
considered

1

4

7

10

13

16

19

Julisch's
algorithm

time
dissi

0.17
1.99

0.45
2.38

0.94
2.43

1.32
2.85

1.69
2.71

1.96
3.82

2.19
3.79

GA-

time

1.14

4.63

7.5

10.8

14.22

16.21

17.96

algorithm

Tree-

dissi
time

1.75
6.76

1.51
1.55

1.39
29.83

1.49
108.9

1.66
452.5

1.52
1209

[3]
1.4
2151.4

apriori

dissi

1.75

1.51

1.39

1.49

1.63

1.46

1.37

'clssil

means

based

version
-1

GA
.....

ctissimiiarity

With table 1, it can be seen that the GA-based

optimization method is quite time-efficient. The time
expense is only several times (the time period is reasonabel)
that it takes Julisch's approximation algorithm.
At the same time, the solutions are of high quality. The
solution quality is quite close to that of the corresponding
accurate ones, and some of them are as good as the
corresponding best ones. Figure 7 shows the dissimilarity
(distance of event set) of the solutions obtained by applying
the three kinds of algorithms: Julisch's approximation
algorithm, GA-based optimization algorithm (consisting of
global optimization and local optimization), and the tree
version apriori.
It takes a considerably long period of time (about 18
seconds in this case) when GA-based optimization algorithm
is applied with many trees (19 trees here). But it is still
useful for two reasons. Firstly, instead of real-time analysis,
the clustering algorithm is used for historical analysis, which

[1]
[2]

[4]
[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]
[9]
[10]

_,_. -....-

Apriorl
II

5

IIIII

10

15

IIII IIIII

IIIII20

N

Figure 7: solution quality of 3 algorithms

REFERENCES
R. Bace. Intrusion Detection. Macmillan Technical Publishing, 2002.
S. Manganaris et al. A Data Mining Analysis of RTID Alarms. In 2nd
Workshop on Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection, 1999. http:
//www.raid-symposium.org/raid99/index.html
Klaus Julisch: Mining Alarm Clusters to Improve Alarm Handling
Efficiency. 17th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference
(ACSAC'01) December 10-14, 2001, New York.
K. Julisch and M. Dacier: Mining Intrusion Detection Alarms for
Actionable Knowledge. Proc. 8th ACM International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Edmonton, July 2002.
K. Julisch. Dealing with False Positives in Intrusion Detection. In 3rd
Workshop on Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection, 2000. http:
//www.raid-symposium.org/raid2000/program.html
Klaus Julisch. Clustering Intrusion Detection Alarms to Support Root
Cause Analysis. ACM Transactions on Information and System
Security 6(4), November 2003
Jianxin Wang, Geng Zhao, Wei Wei, Peng Ye. TTT Language and
TTT Security Log Analyzer. ACNS2004, June 6 - 11, Huangshan,
China.
Jianxin Wang, Geng Zhao and Weidong Zhang. A Subjective
Distance for Clustering Security Events. ICCCAS'05, Hongkong,
China, May 27-30, 2005.
J. H. Holland. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial System. University
of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, Mich, 1975.
R. Agrawal, T. Imielinski, and A. Swami. Mining Association Rules
between Sets of Items in Large databases. In Proc. of the ACM
SIGMOD Conference on Management of Data, Washington, D.C.,
May 1993.

[11] Yongjie Li, Dezhang Yao, Jiancheng Zheng and Jonathan Yao. The
Application of Genetic Algorithm for Beam Directions Optimization
in Radiotherapy. ICCCAS'05, Hongkong, China, May 27-30, 2005.

2097

