Learning attack strategies through mining and
correlation of security alarms
Wang Li Li Zhi-tang Lei Jie
Computer Science Department
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Hubei, Wuhan, China
wtwl@hust.edu.cn leeyingghust.edu.cn leijieghust.edu.cn

Abstract Huge volume of security data from different
security devices can overwhelm security managers and
keep them from performing effective analysis and
initiating timely response. Therefore, it is important to
develop an advanced alert correlation system that can
reduce alert redundancy, intelligently correlate security
alerts and detect attack strategies. In this paper, we
proposed a new method of mining multi-stage attack
behaviors pattern in order to recognize attacker's highlevel strategies and predict upcoming attack intentions.
We apply a reformative Apriori algorithm to mine
frequent attack sequence patterns from history alert data.
We use correlativity between two contextual elements in
the attack sequence to correlate attack behaviors and
identify potential attack intentions. The idea is easy to
implement and it can be used to detect novel multi-stage
attack strategies compared with other techniques.
Experiments show that our approach can effectively learn
high level attack strategies and can accordingly predict
next possible attack behavior.
Keywords-alert, attack sequence pattern, correlativity
I.

INTRODUCTION

Nowadays, many Internet-connected organizations
considered increasing their security budget each year. All
those security application devices, whether aimed at
prevention or detection of attacks, usually generate huge
volumes of security audit data.
Deploying information security (INFOSEC) systems can
provide in-depth protection for networks. However, large
volume of security data which are the output of different
security sensors can overwhelm security managers and keep
them from performing effective analysis and initiating timely
response. Therefore, it is important to develop an advanced
alert correlation system that can reduce alert redundancy,
intelligently correlate security alerts and detect attack
strategies. Correlating security alerts and discovering attack
strategies are important components of such systems.
Up to now, there have been several proposed techniques to
analyze attack scenarios from security alerts. However, most of
these approaches depend on complex correlation rule definition
and hard-coded domain knowledge that lead to their difficult

implementation and limited capabilities of detecting new attack
strategies. In addition, these approaches focus more on analysis
of raw alerts, and construct low-level attack scenarios.
Related work In [1, 2], Cuppens et al. correlates alerts if the
prerequisites of some later alerts are satisfied by the
consequences of some earlier alerts in MIRADOR correlation
method. The attack base was specified in LAMBDA and was
analyzed to generate correlation rules to be used to construct
attack scenarios. Ning et al. [3, 4] use similar method with
MIRADOR. They construct attack scenarios through alert
correlation, using prerequisites and consequences of attacks in
TIAA correlation method. Both approaches are based on the
observation that in a series of attacks, the attacks were usually
not isolated, but related at different stages, with the earlier
stages preparing for the later ones. Such methods can
potentially uncover the causal relationship between alerts, but
they need to define the specification of attacks and the attack
plan recognition results rely on the precision of the correlation
rules. Such limitations make the methods difficult and
complex to complement.
IBM researchers also have made some efforts in this field.
Araujo et al. [5] presents a method of mining correlation rules
from hand-labeled training examples by using rule wizard and
rule editor. It is integrated in the IBM Tivoli Event Console
(TEC). It enables automatic creation of rules, which helps
operators by providing a simple way to create rules based on
observed events, but it relies on the expertise knowledge and
manual configuration. Julisch et al. [6, 7] introduce the
concept of root cause and propose an alarm clustering method
to support the discovery of root cause which can help remove
most of the redundant alarms that can be attributed to a small
number of root causes. This method also need expertise
knowledge and can not solve the problem of false negative.
Valdes et al. [8] proposed a probabilistic-based approach
to correlate security alerts by measuring and evaluating the
similarities of alert attributes. They use a similarity metric to
fuse alerts into meta-alerts to provide a higher-level view of
the security state of the system. Alert aggregation and scenario
construction are conducted by enhancing or relaxing the
similarity requirements in some attribute fields.
Sheyner and J. W. Wing et al. [9] proposed a model
checking based technique to automatically construct attack
graphs. Although it helps facilitate the task of defining attack

Supported by National Science Foundation (NSF) with
Project No. 60573120, and by Hubei Province Science
Fundation (HPSF) 2005ABA25

1-4244-0799-0/07/$25.00 t2007 IEEE

713

graphs, it has the limitation of scalability especially for larger
network and systems.
In [10,1 1], Wenke lee and Xinzhou Qin proposed a GCTbased and Bayesian-based correlation approach to identifying
new alert relationship without depending on prior knowledge
of attack transition patterns. But the method can only
recognize part of an attack scenario.
This paper focuses on discovering attack strategies via
attack sequence pattern mining method which is enlightened
by the method introduced in [12]. In which R. Agrawal and R.
Srikant proposed a method of mining sequential patterns in
customer transactions database. In customer transaction
database, each customer id corresponds to an ordered list of
itemsets which is a sequence defined in the paper. So it is very
different from the attack sequence defined in this paper.
Traditional data mining methods are not suitable for the
problem in security event management, so we propose a
renovated Apriori algorithm to mine attack sequence pattern
from alert database in order to construct attack scenarios
model.

Organization of the paper We solve the problem of mining
attack scenarios model in six phases: i) Sort Phase, ii)
Transformation Phase, iii) Lattackset phase, iv) Filtering
Phase, v) Sequence Phase, vi) Maximal phase. Section 2
introduces our work and the alert preprocessing work before
applying attack sequence patterns mining algorithm. Section 3
gives this problem decomposition. Section 4 reports our
experiments with the 2000 DARPA intrusion detection
scenario specific datasets. We conclude with a summary and
directions for future work in section 5.
AN OVERVIEW OF OUR WORK
In this section, we present an overview of our security
event management system. Our system helps security manager
to rank the alerts with alert-rank algorithm, aggregate
redundant alerts using quantitative method, filter out unrelated
attacks, correlate attack behaviors to construct final attack
scenarios and help security managers to predict future attack
behaviors.
11.

Risk Assessment Report------------0N
T
Network Scan 1

*.

-Alert Ranidng Report

Interface (PHP)
.-rn-r)

)Sel -UlLellUCe

Alert \

Ranking

lr
X

Agg

1ter

8

orrelt
on

Engine

Security

Manager
ceaios

_

~~~~~Setasset value

e

Figure 1. Framework of SATA.

Fig. 1 shows an overview of our framework SATA
(Security alerts & Threats analysis), which is a real-time
system for centralized network security alert analysis. The
main target of SATA is to build an integrated and centralized
platform of security event management and analysis. There are
three data inputs: the alerts and log files from different
security devices, asset information defined by security

administrators, vulnerability and topology information from
real network system generated by network scanners.
Fig. 1 also shows five major functions in our system
including: formalization, alert ranking, aggregation, filter and
correlation. The false positive reduction and risk assessment
procedures are based on the alert-ranking result. All the reports
of these five correlation procedures are output through the
SATA web user interface, implemented by PUP.
Formalization module receives the alerts and log files
generated from different security application devices and stores
them into the alert database after the normalization and format
standardization procedure.
Alert ranking function can then have an access to this
database and prioritize the alerts according to the alert-rank
algorithm. In alert-rank algorithm, we calculate the alert-weight
of each alert, and then use these values to rank the alerts. The
Alert-weight value represents the final assessment of each alert,
with respect to three factors: reliability, asset and priority.
Reliability represents the level of certainty of a reported attack.
That is how probable the attack reported by the alert succeeds.
It is real-time calculated by correlating the alert information
with the vulnerability and topology information provided by
network tools such as Ntop and Nessus. Asset value represents
the importance of the asset. Priority represents the importance
of the isolated attack. The last two values are inputted by
system administrator.
Alert aggregation and Filter modules further analyze the
ranked alerts to remove repetitious and redundant alerts in
order to provide more synthetic information to security
manager and to the following modules. After this phase the
amount of alerts reduced largely.
Correlation engine takes the result of aggregation and
filter functions and further constructs attack scenario models.
Then with the attack scenario models we can recognize the
attack plans of the attackers or even predict the next step the
attacker will take.
As mentioned in the introduction, we will concentrate on
the function of constructing the attack scenarios in this paper.
III.

OVERVIEW OF ATTACK SEQUENTIAL MINING TECHNIQUE
FOR ATTACK PLAN RECOGNITION

After alert ranking and alert aggregation process, the
number of alerts reduced largely and the quality of alerts
improved highly compared with raw alerts. Our attack
scenarios model constructing algorithm is presented based on
the hypothesis that the alerts being processed are high level
alerts in the following paper we simply call them alerts.
The idea of mining attack sequential patterns comes out
from the observation that among all those high level alarms,
most are intended attacks and are of the steps taken by
attackers with specific attack intent. Multi-stage attack
strategy taken by the attacker usually has relatively fixed
attack pattern and happens in a confined time span. Different
attack behaviors in a multi-stage attack have their own attack
sequence happening pattern. For example, in Distributed
Denial of Service (DDOS) attacks, the attacker has to install
the DDOS daemon programs in vulnerable hosts before he can
instruct the daemons to launch an attack. In other words, an
attacker has to reach a certain state before he can carry out

714

next attack steps. The steps of the attacker have certain
behavior pattern and are in certain order.

AttaMk d6tiv1ty padttbm
mt

Oninie attack strategiesrecogn§iton
Real-time hi-alert
Attack pattern
v
.
^ ~ ~ ~ ol ine matching1
MatchX

U_=g

logI

module

AttacS;equentia
MVinilng AlgorithmX

Hi-alert seqen ia

Attac
n_ =
i(1

~Graphic
Graphic

Figure 2. Correlation engine for attack plan recognition

So our alert aggregation method has two components.
them~~~~~~
u
qunittvattackmthd
We
firstusing
mine amulti-stage
activityotheeorutt
patterns with attack
DB
at
ve
thernex
pred
tpteatce
iltk.Fgr
sequential pattern mining method from history alert data. We
then match the alerts online to identify the alerts which are in
accord with certain attack sequential pattern and correlate
them using a quantitative method. Therefore with our
techniques we can recognize the attack plans of the attackers
or even predict the next step the attacker will take. Figure 2
shows the structure of correlation engine for multi-stage attack
recognition.
IV.

MODELS AND ALGORITHMS

A. Attack sequence pattern Mining
[12] introduces a classical sequential mining method. But
it is used for mining sequential patterns in customer
transactions database. Therefore we can use its sequential
mining idea to find attack sequential patterns from alert
database.
We first converts the original alert database D into a
global attack sequence. We use start time attribute of the alert
to sort the alerts in order to form the long global attack
sequence. We map all the alerts to their signature-id attributes
to get the global attack sequence. Therefore attack scenarios
with certain intentions hide in this single sequence.
Now, we need to determine frequent attack sequence
patterns in appropriate attack plan time interval. We transform
the long global attack sequence into a database of candidate
attack sequences. We proposed the definition of attack
scenarios time window to describe the time interval between
the begin time of the first attack step to the end time of the last
attack behavior in a common attack scenarios.
wt ==4
2 3 9 8 17 14 3 2 9 8 14 5 2...

w1. t
Earliest

latest

Figure 3. Transform global attack sequence into candidate attack sequences
with attack scenario time window

We use WI to represent the attack scenarios time
window. Fig. 3 illustrates the process of acquiring candidate
attack sequences from the global attack sequence with Wt.
Sequence <2, 3, 9, 8, 17, 3, 2, 9, 8, 14, 5, 2> represents the global
attack sequence obtained after database resorting process.
Those attacks which fall into the same attack scenarios time
window form a candidate attack sequence.
Thus we get candidate attack sequences database with
attack scenario time window. Then we use the algorithm given
below to mine frequent attack sequential patterns from
candidate attack sequences. We revise the algorithm of Apriori
to adapt it to our attack behavior pattern mining problem.

Algorithm 1 Mining attack sequential patterns
input L, = {large 1-sequence};
begin
for (k=2; Lk-I # 0; k ++) do begin
for (h = 1; h < m; h ++) do begin

for(j= 1;j<n;j++)
j oin iwith I, insert the result into S;

end
delete all subsequences se S such that some (k-1)-sequence of s
is not in Lk_1;
Ck = S; //New candidate large attack sequences generated from
Lk-I

end

foreach c in candidate attack sequence DB do
increment the count of all sequences in Ck that are
contained in c.
L = large attack sequences in Ck with minimum support;
end Hend for

Output = Maximal sequences in

UkLk

The general structure of the algorithm is that we make
multiple passes over the candidate attack sequences database.
In each pass, we start with a seed set of large attack sequences.
We use the seed set for generating new potentially large attack
sequences, called candidate large attack sequences. We find
the support for these candidate large attack sequences during
the pass over the candidate attack sequences database. At the
end of the pass, we determine which of the candidate large
sequences will become the seed for the next pass. In the first
pass, all 1-sequences with minimum support form the seed set.
In this algorithm Lk denotes the set of all large k-sequences,
and Ck denotes the set of candidate large k-sequences.
B. Attack plan recognition
We mine frequent attack sequence patterns from history
data. These attack sequence patterns reflect attack behaviors
occurrence regularity to some extent. But they don't involve
the correlationship between contextual attack behaviors in

715

attack scenarios. So in our system, when we process the alerts
on-line, we calculate the correlativity between contextual
attack behaviors which are matched with certain attack
sequence pattern. Consequently, the security warning report is
given according to the result of matching and calculation. The
concept of correlativity is first proposed by us in [ 15].
We define the correlativity between two alerts with the
correlativities of their attributes. Because the attack behaviors
in an attack scenario have same attack intent, there exists
correlation-ship between two attack steps besides time
association of theirs. For example, the attacker takes the
IPSweep action first and then inquires about the vulnerability.
The source IP or other attributes of the two steps maybe
uniform or may have relationship more or less. The alert
correlativity describes the correlation-ship of two alerts. The
larger the it is, with more possibility the alerts belong to the
same scenarios.
EXPERIMENT
To evaluate the effectiveness of our method, we applied
our algorithm to DARPA 2000 benchmark repository,
scenario-specific datasets [13]. In this section, we describe and
report our experiment results.
We use playback technique (Open source tool
Tcpreplay32 [14]) to induct the workflow to the sensors
integrated in our system. We first performed the experiment
that persisted for 4 weeks to collect history data for attack
sequential mining algorithm. Then we continue our
experiment for 2 weeks to evaluate our method of online
attack plan recognition. Both are performed using the DMZ

security event management and analysis system we formalize
the audit data, rank and aggregate the alerts, detect novel
attack strategies, recognize attack plans and predict
forthcoming attacks. We address the challenges of recognizing
attacker's high-level strategies and predicting upcoming attack
intentions.
We mine frequent attack sequence patterns from candidate
attack sequences database transformed from alert database
with a reformative Apriori algorithm. We also consider the
logical correlationship between different attack behaviors and
use correlativity to correlate the attack behaviors and identify
potential attack intentions. The idea is easy to implement and
it can be used to detect novel multi-stage attack strategies
compared with most existing techniques. Experiments show
that our approach can effectively construct attack scenarios
model and can accordingly predict next possible attack
behavior.

V.

and the inside network traffic of each dataset.

[1]
[2]
[3]

[4]

[5]

Table 1. Correlativity between pair nodes in a matched alarm sequence

First attack i
IpSweep

Second attack j
SadminPing

correlativity
0.81
0.86
0.73
0.68

SadminPing
SadminExploit
Daemonlnstalled
SadminExploit
Daemonlnstalled
DDosAttack
Fig. 4 shows one attack sequence pattern we have mined
and the correlativity between contextual nodes in a matched
alarm sequence. Table 1 gives the value of correlativity
between pair nodes in attack sequence pattern. The
correlativity of attack pair reflects the correlation-ship of two
attack actions. The attack behaviors with correlativities more
than 0.64 is considered as correlated attack behaviors. The
solid lines in fig. 4 indicate the strong relationship between
two attack behaviors. Therefore the result of the judgment is
proved to be correct by the real attack behavior we carried out.
3.81l

-0.86

-0.73

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]

-0.68-

Figure 4. Example of correlativity and attack sequence

VI.

[6]

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

Security audit data increased so dramatically,
management and analysis of these security data become a
critical and challenge issue. In our centralized network

[13]

[14]

[15]

REFERENCES
Fre'de'ric Cuppens. Managing alerts in multi-intrusion detection
environment. In: Proceedings 17th annual computer security
applications conference. New Orleans; 2001. p. 22e3 1.
Fre'de'ric Cuppens, Alexandre Mie ge. Alert correlation in a
cooperative intrusion detection framework. In: Proceedings of the 2002
IEEE symposium on security and privacy; 2002. p. 202eI5.
P. Ning, Y. Cui, and D. S. Reeves, "Constructing attack scenarios
through correlation of intrusion alerts," presented at Proceedings of the
9th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security, Nov
18-22 2002, Washington, DC, United States, 2002.
P. Ning, Y. Cui, D. S. Reeves, and D. Xu, "Techniques and tools for
analyzing intrusion alerts," ACM Transactions on Information and
System Security, vol. 7, pp. 274, 2004.
C. Araujo, A. Biazetti, A. Bussani, J. Dinger, M. Feridun, and A.
Tanner, "Simplifying correlation rule creation for effective systems
monitoring," presented at Utility Computing. 15th IFIP/IEEE
International Workshop on Distributed Systems: Operations and
Management, DSOM 2004. Proceedings, 15-17 Nov. 2004, Davis, CA,
USA, 2004.
K. Julisch, "Clustering intrusion detection alarms to support root cause
analysis," Edmonton, Alta, Canada, 2003.
K. Julisch, "Mining alarm clusters to improve alarm handling
efficiency," New Orleans, LA, USA, 2001.
Valdes, A. and Skinner, K., "Probabilistic alert correlation,"in
Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Recent Advances in
Intrusion Detection (RAID), October 2001.
Sheyner, O., Haines, J., Jha, S., Lippmann, R., and Wing, J. M.,
"Automated generation and analysis of attack graphs,"in Proceedings of
the 2002 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, (Oakland, CA),
May 2002.
W. Lee and X. Qin, "Statistical Causality Analysis of INFOSEC Alert
Data," presented at RAID2003.
Q. Xinzhou and L. Wenke, "Discovering novel attack strategies from
INFOSEC alerts," Sophia Antipolis, France, 2004.
R. Agrawal and R. Srikant, "Mining sequential patterns," Research
Report RJ 9910, IBM Almaden Research Center, San Jose, California,
October 1994.
MIT Lincoln Lab. 2000 DARPA Intrusion Detection Scenario Specific
Data
Sets.
http: /www.ll.mit.edu/I ST/ideval/data/200 0/2000_data_index.html
Aaron Turner, TCPreplay32 tools. http://tcpreplay.synfin.net/trac/
Wang Li, Li Zhi-tang, Wang Qi-hong, "A novel technique of
recognizing multi-stage attack behavior", IEEE International Workshop
on Networking, Architecture and Storages. pp. 188, 2006.

716

