Fifth International Conference on Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery

Real-Time Alert Stream Clustering and Correlation
for Discovering Attack Strategies
Jie Ma, Zhi-tang Li, Wei-ming Li
Computer Science Department
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Hubei Wuhan 430074, China
majie_hust@163.com
launches appropriate response to stop attacks and
prevent them form escalating.
In the past few years, a number of alert clustering
and correlation techniques have been proposed.
However, most of these approaches only focus on
clustering inter-connected alerts into different groups
without further analyzing the strategies of the
attackers. One of the common weaknesses of these
approaches is that they cannot fully discover the causal
relationships between related alerts [1]. Some
techniques for extracting attack strategies have been
proposed in recent years [2][3][4], but they normally
require defining a larger number rules. Ning et al.
[5][6], Cuppens [7][8] build alert correlation systems
based on matching the pre-/postconditions of
individual alerts. The idea of this approach is that prior
attack steps prepare for later ones. One major
limitation to these approaches is that a new attack
cannot be paired with any other attacks because its
prerequisites and consequences are not defined.
Because alert stream is dynamic, huge, infinite and
fast changing, traditional alert correlation methods are
limited on accuracy to discover intrusions by offline
analyzing, and more, these methods are not real time.
We think it is more significant to detect an on-going
attack behavior than afterwards analysis. The main
contribution of the paper is the design of an integrated
correlation system to detect an ongoing attack and
predict the upcoming next step of a multistage attack in
real time. And, our approach can discovery various
attack sequential patterns over different kinds of time
horizons or user-defined time periods.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 introduces the framework of the system. The
details of online alert stream clustering algorithm are
discussed in Section 3. Section 4 presents our alert
correlation method. Section 5 reports our experiments.
Section 6 concludes the paper and outlines future
work.

Abstract
Signature based network intrusion detection
systems (NIDSs) often report a massive number of
elementary alerts of low-level security-related events
which are logically involved in a single multi-stage
attack. Since be overwhelmed by these alerts, security
administrators almost unable to discover complicated
multistage attack in time. It is necessary to develop a
real-time system to extracting useful attack strategies
from the alert stream, which enables network
administrators to launches appropriate response to
stop attacks and prevent them form escalating. This
paper focuses on developing a new alert clustering and
correlation technique to automatically discover attack
strategies from the evolving alert stream, without
specific prior knowledge. The proposed algorithms can
discovery various attack sequential patterns in
different kinds of time horizons or user-defined time
periods. Experiments show our approach can
effectively construct attack scenarios and accordingly
predict next most possible attack behavior.

1. Introduction
In order to counter security threats to computer
systems and networks, many technologies have been
developed and applied in security operations. Signature
based network intrusion detection system (NIDS),
which play an important role in security
countermeasures, have been unable to provide proper
analysis or an effective defense mechanism. They often
report a massive number of elementary alerts of lowlevel security-related events which are logically
involved in a single multistage attack. Since be
overwhelmed by these alerts, security administrators
almost unable to discover complicated multistage
attack in time. It is necessary to develop a real-time
system to extracting useful attack strategies form the
alert stream, which enable network administrators to

978-0-7695-3305-6/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/FSKD.2008.522

379

As a result, the underlying clusters namely hyper-alerts
may also change considerably with time. The crucial
characteristic of steam algorithm is that it must keep up
with the continuously coming alert stream. In addition,
the correlation approach proposed by section 4 must
face the challenge of extracting useful information
from the alert stream over various levels of time
window, which indicates that the alert stream
clustering algorithm must provide the flexibility to
create hyper-alerts over different kinds of time
horizons or user-defined time periods in online time.
The CluStream method proposed by [9] provides an
effective and efficient framework for clustering large
evolving data streams. We borrow the idea from their
work and design the framework of our own system
which is also composed by online and offline modules.
But there is something different from their design that
the offline component is substituted by our alert
correlation module. The status of micro-cluster in [9]
corresponds to the hyper-alert of our framework, while
some cluster features are extended and new ones are
added to satisfy with the needs of the system for
security events analysis and statistics. To maintain
statistics at a sufficiently high level temporal and
spatial granularity, a pyramidal time frame technique
described by [9] is adopted by our system, which
assures that essential statistics of the evolving alert
stream can be captured effectively. The snapshots of
hyper-alerts at differing levels of granularity are stored
in the data warehouse from where hyper-alerts created
in different time periods or intervals can be retrieved
by correlation engine for reconstructing attack
scenarios.
Alert correlation module: The module uses prespecified attack scenario time window (see section 4)
to mine attack sequence patterns that may occur within
this window. Different values about the time window
denote different time horizons, and then attack
sequence patterns happen in different time spans can
be found. The final results are stored into database
warehouse and can be used as rules to recognize the
attack plans of the attacker or even predict the next
step the attacker will take.

2. Framework of proposed system
In this section, we present an overview of our alert
stream clustering and correlation system. Here, the
sequence of alerts produced by IDS sensors can be
referred to alert stream. After preprocessing, every
alert in the stream comply with the standardized
format, which is a 5 tuple: A (AID, SrcIP, DstIP,
SigID, AT). AID is a unique id-number of the security
event; SrcIP and DstIP are the source and target IP
addresses of the security event; SigID is the signature
of security event triggered by sensors; AT indicates the
time when the security event occurs. The security event
in context refers to one attack or one step of a multistage attack.
The sketch of our framework is presented in figure
1. Functions and operations of core modules in the
framework are described as follows:

Figure 1. Framework of alert stream clustering and
correlation process
Alert collection module: The module receives all
standardized alerts reported by sensors, and a unique
ID number is assigned to each alert as soon as it
arrives. Then, the alerts with different IDs will be put
into alert stream queue where they can be obtained by
online alert clustering module. The alert stream is
defined as bellow:
Definition 1. Given an elementary alert with
standardized format denoted by type A (AID, SrcIP,
DstIP, SigID, AT), an alert stream consists of a set of
5-demensional records A1 , A2 , ... Ak , ... arriving at
time stamps T1 , T2 , ... Tk , ... . Each Ai is an instance of
A, here Ai.AT equals to Ti without considering the time
delay for transmitting the alerts from sensors to our
platform, since the delay is small enough to be
ignored.
Online alert clustering module: To ensure the
performance of the real-time system, large volume of
elementary alerts come form the stream are clustered to
create higher-level alert messages, then the number of
alerts for subsequent processing is dramatically
reduced and burden of the platform is alleviated.
Where, the higher-level alert message is denoted as
hyper-alert.
The alert stream is an infinite process consisting of
elementary alert which continuously evolves with time.

3. Online alert stream clustering
The goal of the alert stream clustering is to handle
the elementary alerts produced by multiple NIDS due
to a certain attack, fusing them to create hyper-alerts
which summarizes the characteristics of the detected
attack Furthermore, the nature of evolving alert stream
makes it essential that our alert clustering and
correlation system should have a process which can
continuously determine dominant hyper-alerts within a

380

the notion of Type see definition 3 shown later; the N
denotes the number of lower-level alert objects
maintained by the hyper-alert; Ts is the timestamp for
its first creating and Tn for its latest updating.
As discussed before we note the basic policy of the
clustering approach is determined by comparing the
three features, then the result that is a new created
hyper-alert can be labeled with the Type feature by
using the following definition:
Definition 3. A hyper-alert for a set of lower-level
alert objects {A*1, A*2, ... A*n } is identified by one of
the three types defined as follows:

specified time interval without being dominant by the
previous history of the alert stream. Now, we will give
more details.

3.1. Problem statement
The alert stream clustering module maintains a
queue in an available memory space; hyper-alerts
maintained in the queue represent the current snapshot.
And the clustering approach is an online process
consists of some actions such as updating, merging and
deleting, which can be taken between alerts, hyperalerts or each other. For example, a newly arrived alert
from the stream may be absorbed by an existed hyperalert in memory and the hyper-alert should be updated
consequently, or the alert becomes a new hyper-alert of
its own; different hyper-alerts may also be merged into
a new hyper-alert. However, the issue on when and
how these actions are taken is raised.
The decision to merge two alerts (hyper-alerts)
based on the temporal difference between them and the
information that they contain. If two alerts seem to
occur simultaneously within a certain short time span
and have some common on their information, then they
can be merged together, otherwise they are unrelated
and can not be merged. This policy to merging alerts is
based on our long time of investigation into network
security events and their corresponding alerts trigged
by signature-based NIDS. Some relations owned by
these alerts are obviously found: some alerts occur to
have same information on source IP, target IP
addresses and signature; while some occur to have only
two same features. For example, probing attacks (such
as port-scan) involve many connections from one host
to many others, alerts trigged by these attacks always
have same source IP addresses but different target IP
addresses. On base of these relations, lower-level alerts
can be merged into higher-level alerts (hyper-alerts) by
simply comparing their source IP addresses, target IP
addresses and signature IDs if not considering
temporal differences between themselves. We firstly
give the formal definition of hyper-alert as follows:
Definition 2. A hyper-alert HA is generated by
clustering (merging) a set of lower-level alert objects
{A*1, A*2, ... A*n }; here each lower-level alert object A*i
represents either new elementary alert come from the
stream or old hyper-alert already exists in memory
queue as the result of former clustering. HA is a 8
tuple (HID, HSrcIP, HDstIP, HSigID, Type, N, Ts , Tn)
where HID is assigned a unique number whenever the
hyper-alert is fist created. If some existed hyper-alerts
are merged, the HID of the new created hyper-alert is
generated by a list of ids each of which corresponds to
the constituent hyper-alert; the HSrcIP, HDstIP and
HSigID are inherited from the lower-level alert objects;

TYPE − I : ∀ i, j (i ≠ j,0 <i, j < n) st. Ai* • SrcIP = A*j • SrcIP &&
Ai* • DstIP = A*j • DstIP && Ai* • SigID = A*j • SigID
TYPE − II : ∀ i, j (i ≠ j,0 <i, j < n) st. Ai* • SrcIP = A*j • SrcIP &&
Ai* • DstIP ≠ A*j • DstIP && Ai* • SigID = A*j • SigID
TYPE − III : ∀ i, j (i ≠ j,0 <i, j < n) st. Ai* • SrcIP ≠ A*j • SrcIP &&
Ai* • DstIP = A*j • DstIP && Ai* • SigID = A*j • SigID

In addition, we observe that if we trace the ongoing
alerts in the stream, then quite a lot of alerts are
expected to occur repeatedly in a relatively short time
interval with the same features of SrcIP, DstIP and
SigID, and these alerts can be consequently merged to
form a hyper-alert of Type-I. While in a relatively long
time span these Type-I hyper-alerts resulted from
former merging appear that they can be further merged
to form Type-II or Type-III hyper-alerts. We illustrate
the case with an example: let four elementary alerts A1,
A2, B1, and B2 occur simultaneity within a certain time
window, where A1 and A2 occur relatively closer to
each other and have common values on the
overlapping features that A1.SrcIP =A2.SrcIP, A1.DstIP
=A2. DstIP, A1.SigID =A2.SigID, then a hyper-alert A*
is generated by merging A1 and A2. The same is true of
B1 and B2, and another hyper-alert B* is generated in
the same way. Both A* and B* are identified by the
same type label Type-I. While, if A* and B* satisfy with
the conditions that A*.SrcIP= B*.SrcIP and A*.SigID=
B*.SigID, they can be merged to generate a Type-II
hyper-alert even though they have distinct DstIP. The
case is the same with creating Type-III hyper-alerts.
We can also accounts for these properties by taking
into account the characteristic of attack behaviors. It is
very common that attackers make persistent attack
behaviors with the same intent, which results in
repeatedly reporting alerts on the same attack behavior,
and at the same time these attack behaviors may
involves a large number of distinct target IP addresses
such as port-scan attack, or distinct source IP addresses
such as DDOS attack. This motivates us to cluster the
alerts with common attack intent to reduce the number
of alerts for improving the efficiency of processing.

381

HAq .Tn = Tc .

Thus it can be seen that the proposed alert stream
clustering algorithm is a hierarchical process which
holds differing levels of clustering granularity over
different time widows. In our case, there two levels of
clustering granularity in our algorithm, one is for
creating Type-I hyper-alert, the other is for creating
Type-II or Type-III hyper-alert. More details on the
algorithm will be discussed by following part.

else
Delete HAq from Q and generate a new
hyper-alert HAk corresponding to Ak .
Initialize all features of HAk in the same
way as step2, and insert it into Q.
It means that if the temporal difference is below the
user-defined threshold τ Ak is absorbed by HAq,
otherwise a new hyper-alert is created. These
operations can be viewed as the first-level clustering.
Meanwhile, a copy of each newly generated hyperalert will be sent to the next online module, namely
attack plan recognition module, for predicting the next
step of the attack.
· Step 4: In case there is no available memory space
for storing the newly generated hyper-alert, namely
that all positions in Q are occupied by current hyperalerts, one hyper-alert in Q must be deleted to create
memory space. Given HAd is just the hyper-alert to be
deleted, there must be:

3.2. Overall online clustering algorithm
As discussed above we note that the Type-I hyperalert must be made up of elementary alerts, the Type-II
and Type-III hyper-alert must be originated from TypeI hyper-alerts. And the two levels of clustering
granularity are determined by two different time
window τ and δ , where τ represents a relatively small
time span, δ represents a relatively long time span and
τ < δ . Meanwhile δ is chosen as the particular instant
of time to store 0-th order snapshots (defined in [9]) of
hyper-alerts, which means that δ is the smallest level
of granularity for storing snapshots. Here, the levels of
granularity for storing snapshots have inconsistent
meanings with the levels of clustering granularity, they
are two different concepts. Algorithm 1 describes the
online process of clustering the alert stream.
Algorithm 1.Clustering the alert stream

Tc − HAd • Tn = max { Tc − Qi • Tn }
Qi ∈ Q

where Qi represents any hyper-alert in Q (Qi , HAd ∈Q).
This means that our algorithm approximately deletes
the least recently used hyper-alert which can be
considered less active in the recent stream activity.
· Step 5: Whenever each time period δ arrives, it
should perform the second-level clustering that some
certain Type-I hyper-alerts in Q can be merged to form
Type-II or Type-II hyper-alerts. This can be done as
follows: select the first Type-I hyper-alert from Q as a
reference point denoted by HAr , then scan other Type-I
alerts in Q to find the ones that have the same values of
DstIP and SigID as HAr, and put them together to form
a set QII. Concurrently, another set QIII can also be
formed, where each member in it has the same values
of DstIP and SigID as HAr. Intuitively, different SigIDs
represent different attack behaviors, and Type-I hyperalerts concerning a certain SigID tend to form either
Type-II or Type-III hyper-alert if they can be merged
within some time span. We compare the numbers
contained in the two set. If there are more members in
QII than in QIII, then HAr and all members of QII are
merged together to generate a new Type-II hyper-alert,
which means these alerts are inclined to group
themselves to form a Type-II hyper-alert instead of
Type-III hyper-alert. We call this clustering trend, and
the same applies to generating Type-III hyper-alerts. In
case that QII(QIII) is verified to have the clustering
trend, QIII(QII) will be discarded, then each members
of QII(QIII) and HAr are merged to generate a new
hyper-alert HAn and some positions in Q are free for

· Step 1: We fist allocate some memory space to
initialize a queue (denoted by Q) to maintain the
current snapshot of hyper-alerts which change over the
course of the stream as new alerts arrive. At the very
beginning of the alert stream the queue is empty.
The τ and δ are inputted as parameters with prespecified values.
·Step 2: Whenever a new elementary alert Ak arrives,
compare it with each Type-I hyper-alert in the Q to find
one Type-I hyper-alert that have the same values of
SrcIP, DstIP and SigID as Ak, If Q is empty or such
kind of hyper-alert is not exists, then Ak is put in a
newly generated hyper-alert of its own, the new hyperalert denoted by HAk is assigned with a new HID
number and inserted into Q with initialized features:
HAk .SrcIP = Ak .SrcIP, HAk .DstIP = Ak .DstIP,
HAk .SigID = Ak .SigID, HAk .Type = Type-I,
HAk .N = 1, HAk .Ts = HAk .Tn = Tc .
The Tc represents the current time of the system in the
context of the paper.
· Step 3: If the hyper-alert is found by step 2, let it be
HAq, compare the temporal difference between HAq
and Ak:
if Ak .AT － HAq .Ts <= τ then Update HAq:
HAq .N = HAq .N + 1.

382

newly generated hyper-alerts. HAn is initialized as
follows:
HAn .Type = Type-II (III), HAn .SrcIP = HAr .SrcIP (0),
HAn .DstIP =0 (HAr .SrcIP), HAn .SigID = HAr .SigID,
HAn .N = 1 + numbers contained in QII(QIII),
HAn .Ts = min {HAr .Ts , Qi.Ts },
HAn .Tn = max {HAr .Tn , Qi.Tn }.

created between Ti－WT and Ti can be obtained from
the database, where Ti represents any time point. This
means that the candidate hyper-alert sequences
concerning WT can be generated. For the clarity, we use
Table 1 to illustrate the final form of multiple
subsequences concerning WT, which is similar to the
customer’s transactions.
The advantage owned by the feature SigID is the
fact that it offers enough information to illustrate the
attack behavior or one step of multi-stage attack. So
our correlation approach only focuses on the SigID
feature of the hyper-alerts. As seen from the table, we
use integer numbers instead of hyper-alerts to represent
the candidate attack sequences, where each number is
related to a certain SigID.
Table 1 Candidate attack sequence

Where Qi∈QII(QIII), NULL represents nonsense, and
the HID of HAn becomes an id-list which is a union of
the HIDs in the individual members. We then select the
second Type-I hyper-alert form Q as the reference
point and repeat above operations until the last
reference point.
· Step 6: In case that current time Tc is divisible by
δ i for any integer i (i>0) which indicates the i-th order,
we then store the current snapshot of hyper-alerts in the
data warehouse on corresponding orders.

4. Discovering attack strategies
After online alert clustering process, the number of
alerts reduced largely and the quality of alerts
improved highly compared with raw elementary alerts.
The main task of discovering attack strategies is to
mining attack sequential patterns by analyzing history
hyper-alerts in the data warehouse. Once such patterns
are known, the rules can be produced for describing or
predicting the behavior of the sequence of network
attack. We observe that different multi-stage attack
strategies taken by the attacker usually have their own
attack behavior sequence patterns and happen in a
certain time span which is defined as attack scenario
time window WT. Therefore, the problem of mining
attack sequential patterns becomes to find out the
frequent hyper-alert subsequences among the global
history hyper-alerts sequence that are not less than the
user-specified minimum frequency and complete in
user-specified WT.
A classical sequential mining method GSP proposed
by [10] is initially used for mining frequent sequential
patterns in transaction database to discovery the
customer purchase patterns. All the transactions of a
customer that are sorted in time order is a customer
sequence. The problem of mining sequential patterns is
to find the maximal sequences among all customer
sequences that have a certain user-specified minimum
support. Each such maximal sequence represents a
sequential pattern. Therefore we can use its sequential
mining idea to find attack sequential patterns from the
snapshots of hyper-alert stored in the database. Since
the pyramidal time frame proposed by [9] is adopted
by our clustering algorithm, which the hyper-alerts

Consequently, GSP can execute in the same way as
it does on the transaction database. In addition, our
approach ensures the scalability for various values of
WT, which can mine different attack patterns may
happen in different attack scenario time window.

5. Experiment
To evaluate the effectiveness and validity of our
method, we performed a series of experiments using
DARPA 2000 benchmark repository, scenario-specific
datasets [11]. Snort V2.4.5 was choose as NIDS
sensors. We use playback technique to replay each of
the LLDOS 1.0 and LLDOS 2.0.2 datasets for ten
times separately, and each time we replayed one day’s
attack traffic of DARPA 1999 dataset simultaneously
as the background attacks traffics. And the functions of
replaying were fastened and each time the procedure
lasted for 12 minutes. We run the online alert stream
clustering algorithm with τ setting to 40ms and δ
setting to 120s, the number of the raw alerts is reduced
by almost 90%. Then we run the correlation algorithm
with attack scenario time window setting to 12 minutes
and support value setting to 5 percent. Figure 2 shows
an example of multi-stage attack scenario we have
recognized. We can see this is a DDoS attack in
DARPA 2000 datasets. Attack types, associated with
signature IDs generated by snort, in black circles in the
figure construct the attack sequential pattern. One
attack step usually arouses more than one alert with
different attack types, that is the reason why the

383

number of nodes in attack sequential patterns are more
than the number of the attack steps in a multi-stage
attack.

Research and Development Program of China (863
Program) under Grant No. 2007AA01Z420.

8. References
[1] P. Ning, Y. Cui, D. S. Reeves, and D. Xu: Techniques
and tools for analyzing intrusion alerts. In: ACM
Transactions on Information and System Security, vol. 7, pp.
274, 2004.
[2] Cuppens, F., Ortalo, R. LAMBDA: A language to model
a database for detection of attacks. In: Proc. of Recent
Advances in Intrusion Detection, 2000: 197 -216
[3] J. L.Hellerstein, S. Ma, and C. -S. Perng. Discovering
actionable patterns in event data. IBM Systems Journal,
2002, 41: 475
[4] C. Araujo, A. Biazetti, A. Bussani, J. Dinger, M. Feridun,
and A. Tanner. Simplifying correlation rule creation for
effective systems monitoring. In: 15th IFIP/IEEE
International Workshop on Distributed Systems: Operations
and Management, DSOM 2004 Proceedings. Davis, CA,
USA., 15-17 Nov. 2004: 266-268
[5] P. Ning, Y. Cui, and D. S. Reeves: Constructing attack
scenarios through correlation of intrusion alerts. In
Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Computer and
Communications Security, Nov 18-22 2002, Washington,
DC, United States, 2002.
[6] P. Ning, Y. Cui, D. S. Reeves, and D. Xu: Techniques
and tools for analyzing intrusion alerts. In: ACM
Transactions on Information and System Security, vol. 7,
pp.274, 2004.
[7] F. Cuppens.: Managing alerts in multi-intrusion detection
environment. In: Proceedings 17th annual computer security
applications conference. New Orleans; 2001.
[8] F. Cuppens, A. Miege: Alert correlation in a cooperative
intrusion detection framework. In: Proceedings of the 2002
IEEE symposium on security and privacy; 2002.
[9] C. C. Aggarwal, J. Han, J. Wang, P. Yu. A Framework
for Clustering Evolving Data Streams. VLDB Conference,
2003.
[10] Srikant R, Agrawal R. Mining sequential patterns:
Generalizations and performance improvements. In: Proc.
International
Conference
on
Extending
Database
Technology, EDBT’96, Avignon, France, 1996: 3-17
[11] MIT Lincoln Lab. 2000 DARPA Intrusion Detection
ScenarioSpecificDataSets.http://www.ll.mit.edu/IST/ideval/d
ata/2000/2000_data_index.htm

Figure 2. Example of attack behavior sequential
pattern and attack scenario

6. Conclusion and future work
In this paper, we proposed a novel approach to
discover the complicated multistage attack behavior
patterns. It adopts the sequential pattern mining
algorithm GSP to find out the frequency and sequence
features in attack behaviors. The result of GSP is attack
sequential pattern which are stored as rules for
recognizing the attack plans of the attackers. In order
to detect attack as soon as possible, the real-time alert
stream clustering algorithm is presented. This is a
hierarchical clustering process over different time
intervals, and higher level alerts existed in different
time horizons provide the scalability to mining with
different attack scenario time window. The experiment
result shows the validity of our system in discovery and
predication of attacks.

We will continue to study alert correlation, with
focusing on complementary approaches that can be
integrated into our system to improve the detection
capability. We can also make progress to improve the
system in some other aspects such as alert reduction,
alert verification and so on.

7. Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant No.
60573120, and by the National High Technology

384

