Using Supervised and Transductive Learning Techniques to Extract Network
Attack Scenarios
Narges Khakpour, Saeed Jalili

School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Tarbiat Modares University
{nkhakpour,sjalili}@modares.ac.ir
Abstract
Intrusion detection can no longer satisfy security
needs of an organization solely. Recently, the attention
of security community turned to automatic intrusion
response and prevention, as the techniques, to protect
network resources as well as to reduce the attack
damages. Knowing attack scenarios enables the system
administrator to respond to the threats swiftly by either
blocking the attacks or preventing them from
escalating. Alert correlation is a technique to extract
attack scenarios by investigating the correlation of
intrusion detection systems alerts. In this paper, we
propose a new learning-based method for alert
correlation that employs supervised and transductive
learning techniques. Using this method, we are able to
extract attack scenarios automatically.

1.

Introduction

Although intrusion detection systems have a key
role in protection of network resources, pure intrusion
detection is unable to provide network security
perfectly. We require techniques to respond to the
discovered attacks appropriately by either preventing
them from escalating or blocking them. Furthermore,
current intrusion detection systems generally produce a
large number of alerts which makes it hard to organize
and interpret the alerts. To manage the alerts, we need
a method to extract attack scenarios behind the raised
alerts which enables us to respond the attacks properly.
Alert correlation allows for automatic alert clustering,
which groups logically interconnected alerts into one
group and allows easy analysis of attacks [1]. Having
the attack scenario, the system administrator will be
able to predict the subsequent phases of the attack and
as a consequence react suitably to prevent the attacks
from escalating.
Various approaches to correlate IDS alerts were
proposed in the literature. A class of the alert
correlation techniques is feature-similarity based which
works by comparison of the similarity of the features of
alerts[1 -6]. Supervised learning techniques are
employed in this class of approaches too. However, a

significant drawback of using supervised machine
learning algorithms is lack of a suitable labeled dataset.
Authors in [6] labeled and classified the training
examples manually which requires expert knowledge.
Moreover this process is time-consuming and errorprone. [1] used a small set of records (18 records)
labeled by hand to build their classifier. However, its
efficiency for different dataset needs more study.
In this paper, we propose a new feature-similarity
based method to extract attack scenarios from intrusion
detection alerts focusing on the combination of
transductive and supervised learning methods. The
fundamental part of extracting attack scenario is
determining whether two alerts are correlated or not.
To do that, we build a binary classifier which its output
denotes the correlation of two input alerts. To this aim,
we first take advantage of Transductive Support Vector
Machine (TSVM) algorithm[7] to produce a dataset.
TSVM is a semi-supervised method which uses of
unlabeled data, together with the labeled data, to build
a classifier. Because semi-supervised learning requires
less human effort and gives higher accuracy, it is of
great interest both in theory and in practice[8].
Afterward, we use the supervised learning techniques
to build binary classifiers using the dataset produced by
TSVM. Finally, we introduce an algorithm to construct
attack scenarios from an alert stream which uses the
built binary classifier to decide whether two alerts are
correlated or not. Our major contribution is the use of
semi-supervised learning techniques to tackle the lack
of labeled dataset which is the main problem of using
feature-similarity based techniques to extract attack
scenarios.
The remainder of the paper is organized as
follows. We give a summary of related works in
Section 2. In Section 3 we explain how to visualize the
correlation between alerts. Section 4 explains the
features used in our method. Section 5 introduces the
proposed method. Section 6 presents our experiment
results and Section 7 gives conclusion.

Proceedings of the 14th International CSI Computer Conference (CSICC'09)
978-1-4244-4262-1/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE
71

2.

Related Works

Several alert correlation approaches were proposed
in the past several years to construct high-level attack
scenarios which are classified into three categories.
• The first category includes approaches that work
based on the similarity of alert features(e.g.,[1-4]).
This class of alert correlation approaches correlates
alerts based on the similarity of alert attributes, such
as source IP address, target IP address, and port
number etc.
• The second category of alert correlation
approaches is the pre-defined attack scenario based
approach(e.g., [6, 9]). They detect the scenarios by
matching the alert streams with the predefined attack
patterns. Although they work well for well-defined
attack sequences, but they cannot discover novel
attack scenarios [9].
• The last category is the Prerequisite/C onsequence
approaches [10-12]. While an attack is happening in
the network, different alerts are reported. The alerts
are not isolated and each one relates to the different
stages of the attack scenario. This kind of approaches
discover attack scenarios through matching the postcondition of an alert with the pre-condition of its later
ones. Even though using this class of approaches one
can detect novel scenarios however specifying the
pre-condition and post-condition of alerts is timeconsuming and error-prone and requires specific
knowledge about the attacks in order to identify their
prerequisites and consequences.

3.

Alert Correlation Representation

A hyper-alert correlation graph shows the set of
alerts belonging to the same scenario. It can potentially
reveal intrusion strategies behind a series of attacks,
and thus leads to a better understanding of the
attackers’ intention[13].
Definition 1.
A hyper-alert correlation graph
  ,  is a directed acyclic graph, where the set
N of nodes is a set of alerts and for each pair alerts
and , there is a directed edge from
to
in E if
and only if prepares for .
The high-volume of alerts in the hyper-alert
correlation graphs makes them large, complex and
subsequently hard to understand and analyze. To
overcome this problem, one way is to aggregate alerts
in a hyper-alert correlation graph on some heuristics.
Since an attacker may compromise a machine several
times, so we can aggregate alerts with same source IP
addresses, destination IP addresses and alert types.
However, our experiments show that this technique can
not reduce the nodes of graphs remarkably. Therefore,

we aggregate alerts with the same destination IP
addresses and alert types occurred in a predetermined
time interval. Using this technique, the size of the
graph reduces dramatically. Therefore, in this paper we
define the attack graphs as Definition 2:
Definition 2.
An attack graph   ,  is a
directed graph, where each member of N is a collection
of alerts aggregated based on their destination IP
addresses and alert types. Also, for each pair alert
clusters C , C  N, there is a directed edge from  to
 in E if and only if there is at least an alert such as
  C that is correlated to alert   C .
It is worth noting that we use the hyper-alert
correlation graphs to extract and construct the
scenarios, but the attack graphs are used just to
visualize the final constructed attack scenarios. The
hyper-alert correlation graphs enable us to explore the
attack scenario over time, but the attack graphs cannot
represent the progress of the attack over time explicitly.
Therefore, in some situations we need both graphs to
analyze the attack scenario accurately.

4.

Feature Extraction

As mentioned before, our method is categorized as
a feature similarity-based approach. It works by pairwise comparison of the features of alerts in order to
determine whether those alerts are correlated or not.
Therefore, first we are supposed to introduce the
features we use. When an intrusion detection system
triggers an alert, it provides raw data associated to that
alert, such as source IP address, target IP address,
source port number, destination port number, alert
type, alert ID, timestamp, etc. These attributes are used
to determine the correlation of two alerts. In our
method, we take into account the following features to
evaluate the correlation of the alerts which four first
features are common in the literature.
Source IP Addresses Similarity The most
obvious way to correlate alerts together is by source IP
address. Actually, the source IP address denotes the
identity of the attacker. Therefore, it is likely that alerts
belonging to a single scenario share a common source
address. However, the attacker may coordinate the
attack from different source addresses in a more
complex attack. The value of this feature is calculated
[6] as formula (1) that indicates the likelihood that the
same attacker directs two alerts. In this formula, n
shows the maximum number of high order bits
matched between two addresses. In the cases that the
source IP address is unknown, we perform rigorously
and consider the similarity of the source IP addresses
of the alerts as 1.

Proceedings of the 14th International CSI Computer Conference (CSICC'09)
72

γIP , IP

n
32



Identical Destination Ports Before an attacker
can exploit the vulnerability of a service that is running
on a particular port; she must firstexamine if the port is
opened[1]. Therefore, alerts with identical destination
ports are probably associated to the same attack
scenario. This feature is binary that values 1 and 0
denote the alerts with the same and different
destination ports respectively.
Destination IP Addresses Similarity Destination
IP address can be viewed as the identity of the victim.
Therefore, alerts with the same destination IP addresses
are expected to belong to the same attack scenario. The
similarity between two destination IP addresses is
calculated by formula (1) too.
Matching Source Address and Destination
Address In various types of attacks, the attacker first
compromises an intermediary machine as zombie and
then uses it to attack the target victim. Therefore, if the
source address of an alert matches the destination
address of a previous alert, they probably are
correlated.
Correlation Strength of Alert Types It is
obvious that the features of alerts cannot solely
determine the correlation between alerts, i.e. we must
enter the expert knowledge in some way. To do that,
we define the correlation probability of the alert types
which its value is updated frequently at runtime.
Suppose  and  denote the classes of alerts  and 
respectively. The value of this feature varies between 0
and 1 shown with  ,  . The algorithm of extracting
scenarios (Fig. 1) starts with a default value for all
 ,   that is determined by the expert knowledge.
The value of  ,   is calculated by formula (2)
where N denotes the number of times that the
correlation of the alerts with types  and  were
computed and n denotes the number of times they are
indicated as correlated. Furthermore, m=N-n and γ ,
indicate the previous correlation strength of  and  .
We consider two sigmoid functions to consider the
effects of the preceding correlation results in the new
value of  ,  . The parameters  and  show the
weight of the number of times the alert types were and
were not correlated respectively. We choose sigmoid,
since it changes smoothly respect to the parameters 
and . Authors in [1] consider a similar feature,
however it differs from us in definition and update
method.
 , 




2

 "
#$!  %&' ,&( /3
!
2



5.

The Proposed Method

In order to determine whether two alerts are
correlated or not, we build a classifier by the
supervised learning techniques. However, we should
first prepare the training examples to train the
classifier. We employ the transductive learning
techniques to set up the dataset. Then, we propose an
algorithm that extracts the attack scenarios from an
alert stream. This algorithm uses the built binary
classifier in the previous phase to decide on the
correlation of two alerts. This section explains our
approach in more details.
5.1.

Phase 1- Dataset Creation

The fundamental concern to build a classifier
using supervised algorithms is the availability of an
appropriate labeled dataset to train the classifier. In
many real-world applications, labeling is often
expensive, while an enormous amount of unlabeled
examples are available easily. The acquisition of
labeled data often requires an expert to manually
classify the training examples. Nonetheless, the cost of
the labeling process may make a fully labeled training
set infeasible. In such situations, semi-supervised
learning can be of great practical value, which uses
both labeled and unlabeled data for training process.
Transductive learning is a category of semi-supervised
learning approaches which uses a small number of
labeled examples and a large number of unlabeled
examples. A large number of unlabeled examples often
provide enough information about the distribution of
the whole sample space [14]. The learning phase task is
to predict the labels of input dataset including the
unlabeled data.
The Transductive Support Vector Machine
(TSVM) [7] algorithm proposed by Vapnik is a
transductive learning algorithm that we use in this
research to create the training dataset. To do that, we
first manually prepare a small set of labeled data (20
records) as the background knowledge. Then, we
combine 600 more records generated randomly with 20
labeled data as the input training set of TSVM. The
output of TSVM contains 620 labeled data which is
used to train the classifiers in the next phase.
5.2.

Phase 2- Building Classifiers

Having the training dataset, we are able to build
binary classifiers. In this phase, we built the binary
classifiers by means of a supervised learning algorithm.
In this research, we use decision trees (C4.5 and
Ripper), AdaBoosting and Naïve Bayse learning
techniques. However, due to the lack of space, in this

Proceedings of the 14th International CSI Computer Conference (CSICC'09)
73

paper we only focus on the results of C4.5
AdaBoosting.
5.3.

Phase 3Scenarios

Construction

of

the

and

∑  , 

 
||

3

Algorithm BUILDSCENARIO
WHILE there are still alerts in the file
Read the next alert from the file
FOR eachscenario in memory
Compute its correlation strength with the new
alert
END FOR
Find the scenario with the greatest correlation
strength
If the correlation strength of the found scenario is
greater than α
Add new alert to the current scenario
If recent alert has not been merged with existing
scenarios
Generate a new scenario with current alert
END WHILE

Figure 1. The Algorithm to build the attack scenarios

6.

Step
1

Attack

Fig. 1 shows the algorithm to build the attack
scenarios from an alert stream. Here we refer to the
hyper-alert correlation graphs (not the attack graphs) as
the scenarios. When a new alert is triggered, we must
first identify the scenario that the alert belongs to. To
do that, the correlation strength between the new alert
and all the current scenarios are computed separately
and the alert finally will join with the scenario with the
greatest correlation strength provided that the
corresponding correlation strength is greater than a
predefined threshold. If there is no such scenario, a
new scenario is created with the new alert as its only
member. As mentioned before, to identify if two alerts
are correlated or not, we use the classifier built in phase
2. The correlation strength of alert  and scenario  is
defined as formula (3) wherein || denotes the number
of alerts of S and  and  show the alert class of 
and  respectively.
 , 

Table 1. Alerts correspondent to the different stages of
LLDOS 1.0

Experiment Results

We performed a series of experiments using the
2000 DARPA intrusion detection scenario specific data
sets [15] that includes LLDOS 1.0 and LLDOS2.02
scenarios to examine the effectiveness of the proposed
method. Due to the lack of space, we just focus on the
results of applying our method on LLDOS 1.0
scenario.

Raised alert types
-

2

Sadmind_Ping

3

Admind, SadmindAmslVerify_Overflow

4

RSH, Telnet, MStreamZombie

5

MStream_DDOS

LLDOS 1.0 contains a series of attacks in which
an intruder probes, breaks-in, installs a daemon to
launch the Distributed Denial of Service (DDOS)
attack, and finally launches a DDOS attack against an
off-site server. It consists of a multistage attack as
follows:
Step 1. The attacker IP sweeps for live host IPs from
a remote site. The attacker sends ICMP echo-requests
in this sweep and listens for ICMP echo-replies to
determine which hosts are "up"[15].
Step 2. The hosts identified live in the previous phase
are probed to determine which hosts are running the
"sadmind" daemon. Therefore, the attacker can
identify the vulnerable hosts to the exploit that she
has. To probe the host, the intruder uses the "ping"
option of the sadmind exploit program.
Step 3. The attacker then tries to break into the hosts
running the sadmind service in the previous phase.
Then she compromises target hosts via the sadmind
vulnerability (sadmind buffer overflow), totally there
are 6 exploit attempts on each potential victim host.
To test whether or not a break-in was successful, the
attack script attempts a login, via telnet.
Step 4. In this phase, the attacker for each
compromised hosts performs a telnet login and install
the Trojan mstream DDoS software on the
compromised hosts.
Step 5. In the final phase, the DDOS is launched
manually.
In our experiment, we use the alert log file [16]
generated by RealSecure IDS. RealSecure produces
922 alerts for LLDOS1.0. The alerts related to the
different steps of LLDOS scenario is shown in Table 1.
Realsecure does not raise any alert for the ICMP
probing activity executed by the attacker[1, 13, 17].
In our experiment, the Weka data mining package
was used for all experiments.
6.1.

Extracting Attack Scenarios using C4.5

C4.5 is an algorithm used to generate a decision
tree which builds decision trees by recursively
selecting attributes on which to split. The criterion for
choosing an attribute is information gain. In the first
experiment, we use C4.5 algorithm to build the binary
classifier, which uses the dataset generated by TSVM
for training.

Proceedings of the 14th International CSI Computer Conference (CSICC'09)
74

Then, we apply the proposed method on the inside
traffic in LLDOS 1.0 with the binary classifier built by
C4.5 as its correlator engine. We perform this
experiment with   2 and   2. Multiple attack
graphs were discovered that exhaustive analysis of all
the constructed attack graphs is out of the scope of this
paper. Figures 2 and 3 show the attack graphs
corresponding to the DDoS attack scenario. The text
inside each node represents the name of the alert type
followed by the alert destination IP address. The attack
graph shown in Figure 3 clearly shows the strategy
behind the sequences of the attack. The first step is

missing in this attack scenario since RealSecure does
not report any alert for this stage. Our method splits the
LLDOS 1.0 scenario in three subgraphs.
Although our algorithm for building the hyperalert correlation graphs does not relate these sub-graphs
but it does not mean that their contained alerts are not
correlated too. When a new alert arrives, its
correlations with all the current hyper-alerts graphs are
computed and it joins with the scenario with higher
correlation strength. In other words, an alert can be
correlated to the alerts in other hyper-alert graphs.

Figure 2. The attack graph correspondent to the LLDOS1.0 scenario (C4.5 result)-Part 1

Figure 3. The attack graph correspondent to the LLDOS 1.0 scenario (C4.5)-Part 2

Figure 4. The attack graph correspondent to the
LLDOS1.0 scenario(AdaBoosting)-Part 1

Figure 5. The attack graph correspondent to
LLDOS1.0 scenario (AdaBoosting)-Part2

Proceedings of the 14th International CSI Computer Conference (CSICC'09)
75

In addition to the LLDOS1.0 attack scenario
described above, other attack graphs are constructed
too: (1) our method correlates a high number of
Email_Almail_Overflow and Email_Ehlo alert types
together. This scenario is extracted since an attacker
tries to gain unauthorized access to several hosts inside
the
network
[1]
which
triggers
multiple
Email_Almail_Overflow and Email_Ehlo alerts. (2)
Another similar attack scenario revealed by the
proposed method contains multiple FTP alerts such as
FTP User, FTP Pass and FTP Syst. (3) A further
discovered scenario correlates multiple telnet alerts
TelnetTerminaltype. Actually this alert type does not
indicate a threat, however it is used to log the terminal
type used for forensics purposes. It denotes the
beginning of a telnet session. Therefore, this scenario
explains that the intruder attempts to telnet to the other
hosts.
6.2.

Extracting
AdaBoosting

Attack

Scenarios

using

Boosting is a general method for improving the
accuracy of any given learning algorithm. In the first
experiment, though the DDOS attack scenario were
extracted to good extent, however it was split into three
scenarios. In order to improve the results, in another
experiment we use AdaBoosting [18] as the learning
algorithm to build the binary classifier that relies on
C4.5 as its base learning algorithm. Moreover, we use
the same dataset used in the prior experiment.
Then, we apply the proposed method on inside
traffic in LLDOS 1.0. The method constructs several
attack graphs. Figures 4 and 5 show the attack graphs
corresponding to the DDoS attack scenario. In this
experiment, the results are improved a bit because the
scenario is split into two subgraphs. The DDOS attack
scenario discovered by C4.5 identifies 172.016.112.050
as the IP-swept host while AdaBoosting specifies
172.016.112.010. We explained the reason behind
splitting the graphs before. Furthermore, in this
experiment other hyper-alert correlation graphs like
those constructed by C4.5 are extracted too.

7.

Conclusion

In this paper, we proposed a new learning-based
method to correlate alerts generated by an intrusion
detection system. This method employs the combination
of supervised and transductive machine learning
techniques to determine the correlation of the alerts. To
evaluate our method, we conducted various experiments
using DARPA Dataset 2000. Our results show that the
proposed method can extract the attack scenarios to a
reasonable extent.

8.

References

[1] B. Zhu and A. A. Ghorbani, "Alert Correlation for
Extracting Attack Strategies," International Journal of
Network Security, vol. 3, pp. 244-258, Nov. 2006.
[2] F. Cuppens, "Managing Alerts in a Multi-Intrusion
Detection Environment," in Proceedings of the 17th Annual
Computer Security Applications Conference: IEEE Computer
Society, 2001.
[3] S. Stuart, A. H. James, and M. M. Joseph, "Practical
automated detection of stealthy portscans," Journal of
Computer Security,vol. 10, pp. 105 -136, 2002.
[4] J. Klaus, "Clustering intrusion detection alarms to
support root cause analysis," ACM Transactions on
Information and System Security (TISSEC), vol. 6, pp. 443471, 2003.
[5] V. Alfonso and S. Keith, "Probabilistic Alert
Correlation," in Proceedings of the 4th International
Symposium on Recent Advances in Intrusion Detection:
Springer-Verlag, 2001.
[6] O. M. Dain and R. K. Cunningham, "Fusing a
heterogeneous alert stream into scenarios," in Proceedings of
the 2001 ACM Workshop on Data Mining for Security
Applications, 2001, pp. 1-13.
[7] V. N. Vapnik, Statistical Learning Theory, 1998.
[8] Z. Xiaojin, "Semi-supervised learning with graphs,"
Doctoral Thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, 2005.
[9] B. Morin and H. Debar, "Correlation of Intrusion
Symptoms: An Application of Chronicles," in Recent
Advances in Intrusion Detection, 2003, pp. 94-112.
[10] J. T. Steven and L. Karl, "A requires/provides model for
computer attacks," in Proceedings of the 2000 workshop on
New security paradigms, Ireland, 2000.
[11] F. Cuppens and A. Mige, "Alert Correlation in a
Cooperative Intrusion Detection Framework," in Proceedings
of the 2002 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy: IEEE
Computer Society, 2002.
[12] N. Peng, C. Yun, and S. R. Douglas, "Constructing attack
scenarios through correlation of intrusion alerts," in
Proceedings of the 9th ACM conference on Computer and
communications security Washington, DC, USA: ACM, 2002.
[13] P. Ning, Y. Cui, and D. Reeves, "Analyzing Intensive
Intrusion Alerts Via Correlation," Technical Report: TR-200204, North Carolina State University at Raleigh, 2002.
[14] Y. Chen, G. Wang, and S. Dong, "Learning with
progressive transductive support vector machine " Pattern
Recognition Letters, vol. 24, pp. 1845-1855, August 2003.
[15] MIT Lincoln Laboratory, 2000 Darpa Intrusion
Detection Scenario Specific Datasets, 2000.
[16] "Tiaa: A toolkit for intrusion alert analysis," North
Carolina State University, Cyber Defense Laboratory,
http://discovery.csc.ncsu.edu/software/correlator/ver0.4/index.
html, 2005.
[17] L. F. Salim and A. Mezrioui, "Improving the Quality of
Alerts with Correlation in Intrusion Detection," International
Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, vol. 7, pp.
210-215, 2007.
[18] Y. Freund and R. E. Schapire, "A decision-theoretic
generalization of on-line learning and an application to
boosting," Journal of Computer and System Sciences, vol. 55,
pp. 119-139, 1997.

Proceedings of the 14th International CSI Computer Conference (CSICC'09)
76

