200

IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, Vol. 62, No. 2, May 2016

A Multi-stage Attack Mitigation Mechanism for
Software-defined Home Networks
Shibo Luo, Jun Wu, Member, IEEE, Jianhua Li, and Longhua Guo

Abstract —Software-defined Home Networks (SDHN) is a
key development trend of smart home which is proposed to
realize multi-home visual sharing. With the improved
openness and programming ability, SDHN faces increased
network threat than traditional home networks. Especially,
because of the diversity and heterogeneity of smart home
products, multi-stage attack is more convenient to be
performed in SDHN. To mitigate multi-stage attack in SDHN,
some significant problems are needed to be addressed. The
first problem is security assessment along with attack events.
The second one is countermeasure selection problem based on
security assessment result and security policy. The third one is
attack mitigation countermeasure deployment problem
according to current network context to meet the
countermeasure decision instantly. In this paper, a multi-stage
attack mitigation mechanism is proposed for SDHN using
Software-Defined Networking (SDN) and Network Function
Virtualization (NFV). Firstly, an evidence-driven security
assessment method using SDN factors and NFV-based
detection is designed to perform security assessment along
with observed security events. Secondly, an attack mitigation
countermeasure selection method is proposed. The evaluation
shows that the proposed mechanism is effective for multi-stage
attack mitigation in SDHN1.
Index Terms —Software-defined home networks, Network
function virtualization, Attack graph, Multi-stage attack
mitigation.

I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, smart home becomes a hot issue in
consumer electronics [1], [2]. Smart home is usually used to
define a residence which has smart appliances, computers,
smart TVs, and entertainment audio & video systems [3], [4].
These smart appliances are capable of communicating with

1
This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant No. 61401273 and 61431008), Doctoral Scientific Fund Project of the
Ministry of Education of China (No. 20130073130006).
Shibo Luo is with the School of Electronic Information and Electrical
Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China (e-mail:
luoshibo.pla@sjtu.edu.cn).
Jun Wu is with the School of Electronic Information and Electrical
Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China (e-mail:
junwuhn@sjtu.edu.cn).
Jianhua Li is with the School of Electronic Information and Electrical
Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China (e-mail:
lijh888@sjtu.edu.cn).
Longhua Guo is with the School of Electronic Information and Electrical
Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China (e-mail:
staring@sjtu.edu.cn).

Contributed Paper
Manuscript received 03/30/16
Current version published 06/29/16
Electronic version published 06/29/16

one another and can be controlled remotely from any location
in the world by phone or Internet [5], [6].
As smart home automation products flood the market, they
become easy targets for network attackers [7]. Among the
attacks, some are specific to smart home. Especially, some of
the attacks maybe produce physical harm to the home system
or people’s security. For example, an adversary could
fabricate messages to the Energy Services Interface requesting
that all devices within the home get switched on or switched
off. These could threaten the lives of the resident family if life
support equipment is hacked by this mean. Furthermore, when
smart home interconnects these automation products and
opens access to remote devices through Internet, it leads the
home networks to face increased security threat because local
vulnerabilities will introduce new security holes [8]. This
makes multi-stage attack the most harmful one to smart homes.
Moreover, diversity and heterogeneity of connected smart
devices introduce various management and interoperability
problems [8]. It makes the home networks more convenient to
multi-stage attack. An effective multi-stage attack mitigation
scheme is needed.
On the other hand, Software-Defined Networking (SDN)
has attracted great attentions as emerging future network
architecture, whose control plane is decoupled from
forwarding and directly programmable. This feature is of great
help to simplify policy enforcement and network
configuration and evolution [9].
Besides SDN, Network Function Virtualization (NFV) is
also an attractive new technology to network management. It
enables network appliances, such as firewalls, Deep Packet
Inspection (DPI), and Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), to
be deployed in software as virtualized components
provisioned in general-purpose hardware systems [10], [11].
And until now, the key challenges in the implementation of
NFV are conquered as illustrated in [11], in which the key
obstacle is the performance of the smart home automatics
products to process network flows. The overhead of handling
interrupts in operation system exceeds the time spent
processing packets, packet copies in operation system
introduce a high cost, and the overhead in network I/O in
virtualized settings is enormous. NFV has brought benefits to
home networks. For example, by facilitating the virtualization
of the home networks through high-throughput last-mile
access capability, NFV brings down the complexity of IPTV
services [10].
SDN and NFV paradigms are excellent matches to
address the problems in smart home. In recent years, many
researches focus on the integration of SDN and smart home
networks named Software-defined Home Networks (SDHN)
[3], [4]. A SDHN system is proposed to realize multi-home

0098 3063/16/$20.00 © 2016 IEEE

S. Luo et al.: A Multi-stage Attack Mitigation Mechanism for Software-defined Home Networks

visual sharing which has attracted increased attention in the
market [3]. The devices in the scheme enable on-demand
provisioning for protocol-agnostic home networking. Thus it
releases home users from manually configuring devices and
installing software applications and provides a high degree
of flexibility for intra-home and inter-home networking.
Although it brings home networks several advantages
such as convenience and efficiency, SDHN also causes some
hidden security problems. Because of the existence of
application APIs in SDHN, attackers have more chances to
compromise SDHN than traditional networks. In addition,
the heterogeneity of SDHN makes security assessment more
difficult. Thus, providing an unrivalled security service is a
critical issue for SDHN [12]-[14].
There are already some researches focusing on the
security issue about smart home networks. Some researchers
introduce lightweight and secure session key establishment
scheme for smart home. The mechanism provides important
security attributes including prevention of various popular
attacks, such as denial-of-service and eavesdropping attacks
[15]. Some other researchers design a secure access gateway
for home area networks which can monitor and control the
smart devices in real-time and secure them. But all of them
focus on isolated security issue in smart home networks, no
researches focus on the special features in SDHN [16].
The distinct features brought by SDN and NFV facilitate
the attack mitigation in SDHN. Intuitively, SDN provides
the advantage to monitor the entire network including all
network events including attack evidences, and then the
security application above the controller can measure the
current security state of the network and make a
countermeasure decision. When the security application
makes a countermeasure decision, it can notify the controller
to deploy the security mitigation plan utilizing its
programmability and NFV’s virtualization property.
There are three important problems need to be addressed
in the above intuition. The first one is security assessment
problem along with attack events. In security assessment
field, the attack graph is a dominant method [17]-[19]. But
most of them do not focus on SDN. The second one is
countermeasure selection problem based on security
assessment result and security policy. Some researchers
have focused on countermeasure selection [17]-[19]. Most
of them are special to their own context and cannot be
applied to smart home networks directly. The third one is
attack mitigation countermeasure deployment problem
according to current network context to meet the
countermeasure decision instantly. As a result, a multi-stage
attack mitigation mechanism to solve the above problems is
badly needed in SDHN.
At the same time, with the increased significant security
requirements, network appliances are gradually equipped in
home networks. Especially, IDS for home networks has
attracted a lot of attentions [20]-[22]. For example, a
specification-based IDS was proposed for home networks in
smart grids [20]. The normal behavior of the home networks
is defined through selected specifications which are
extracted from the IEEE 802.15.4 standard in IDS. Also,

201

some intrusion detection schemes were proposed for the key
devices in home networks. For example, an IDS solution
was proposed for home-router defending against mid-stream
injection attacks [22]. The facts make it practical to address
the aforementioned problems inheriting traditional home
networks security appliances in home networks.
This paper studies the three important problems and
proposes an effective multi-stage attack mitigation scheme.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: The multistage attack mitigation mechanism for SDHN is described in
Section II. Security assessment driven by evidences using
SDN and NFV is discussed in Section III. And
countermeasure selection solution based on SDN and NFV
is discussed in Section IV. Evaluate of the proposed scheme
is illustrated in Section V. and the paper is concluded in
Section VI.
II. THE PROPOSED ATTACK MITIGATION MECHANISM
A. Proposed Architecture for SDHN
With the development of modern information technologies,
customers pay more attention to network capability and
security in home networks. Based on the SDN-enabled future
home-networking [3], the enhanced architecture which has the
system ability to monitor comprehensive network events and
deploy the network security functions instantly is proposed. It
is beneficial to mitigate multi-stage attack in SDHN. The
proposed architecture is shown in Fig. 1.
There are two important features in the architecture. The
first one is that the SDN controller is enhanced. It not only
controls the smart devices but also control the other network
appliances such as IDS, firewall and logger. The second one
is that the smart devices and network appliances have the
ability to install Virtual Network Function (VNF). It is
practical because of the improvement of the capabilities of the
processors and storages in current smart devices and network
appliances.

Fig. 1. SDN/NFV-based smart home networks architecture. It has the
ability to monitor comprehensive network events and deploy the network
security functions instantly.

202

More details about the SDN controller and smart devices
are illustrated in Fig. 2.
Besides the common components of SDN controller such as
northbound interface and southbound interface, there are other
eight components in the enhanced SDN controller.
The VNF registry functional entity maintains all the
information about the VNFs that registered initiate. The
information includes function, required resource, cost, effect
and etc. The VNF discovery functional entity provides VNF
selection and negotiation capabilities. It interacts with the
VNF registry functional entity to select the VNFs that match
security criteria. The SDN controller management functional
entity collects the network information from the control panel.
Also it notifies the controller to perform the security policy.
The VFN management functional entity collects the security
events from the VFN nodes in the domain. Also it notifies the
VFN nodes to perform the security policy. The evidencedriven security assessment functional entity is triggered by
attack evidences, and measures the current security state along
with the evidences. When it judges that the system is in
danger, it triggers the attack countermeasure functional entity
to decide mitigation plan. The attack countermeasure
functional entity decides the attack mitigation plan obeyed the
security policy sent from the security applications. And it
enforces the security polices in virtual network functions
management functional entity and SDN controller
management functional entity. The network events collector
functional entity monitors the network defense appliances
such as IDS, firewall, and sends the events to evidence-driven
security assessment functional entity. Controller stores various
types of VNFs such IDS, firewall and logging. The form of
VNFs is binary code or interpreted language scripts. And in
proposed switches, besides table flow, there exists several
VNF containers. The VNF container maybe is virtual machine
or interpreter in form.

Fig. 2. Details of proposed SDN controller and smart devices. SDN
controller and smart devices integrate the features of SDN with NFV to
protect smart home networks.

IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, Vol. 62, No. 2, May 2016

B. Workflow of Attack Mitigation
The workflow of proposed attack mitigation framework is
illustrated in Fig. 3. The SDN controller and VNF
management entity register their resources and send their
status to network. Then the system has the global view of
network topology and VNFs. When an event is collected by
network events collector, an evidence-driven security
assessment process using attack graph model and posterior
inference is triggered. Based on the assessment result, security
countermeasure selection process using constrained
optimization algorithm decide an attack mitigation plan. At
last, the system enforces the security policies of SDN
controller and VNF management according to the attack
mitigation plan.

Fig. 3. Workflow of attack mitigation mechanism. SDN controller acts as
the brain and information collector and NFV acts as security measures.

III. EVIDENCE-DRIVEN SECURITY ASSESSMENT USING
SDN FACTORS AND NFV BASED DETECTION
A. Mechanism of Evidence-Driven Security Assessment using
SDN Factors and NFV-based Detection
The mechanism of evidence-driven security assessment
using SDN factors and NFV based detection is illustrated in
Fig. 4.
In the mechanism, SDN controller collects topology and
vulnerabilities information instantly. The information mainly
includes network nodes, connectivity and vulnerabilities lies
in the network nodes. It is easy to do the job for SDN
controller because its central control role in the network.
Then SDN controller generates the attack graph with
current probabilities using later algorithms.
Traditional network defense appliances and NFV-based
network defense appliances detect real-time security events in
the network and send them to SDN controller. Then SDN
controller measures the current security level driven by these
evidences using the algorithms of evidence-driven security
assessment discussed in later section.

S. Luo et al.: A Multi-stage Attack Mitigation Mechanism for Software-defined Home Networks

By this means, attack graph with new probabilities is
generated. It can denote the current security level of the
network.

203

is conducted. Since an action will change its
consequent network state only when it succeeds, Φ is
also the probability that an action set its consequent
node variables to be True.
Consequently, a typical network attack graph is like the one
illustrated in Fig. 5:

Fig. 4. Mechanism of evidence-driven security assessment using SDN
factors and NFV based detection. The mechanism is comprehensive and
dynamic.

B. Proposed Attack Graph
Abstractly, an attack graph is a collection of scenarios
showing how a malicious agent can compromise the integrity
of a target system. Attack graph is used as the method to
measure static network security level defined as follows.
Definition 1: A network attack graph is a 7-tuple directed

Fig. 5. A typical network attack graph. It shows all possible scenarios that
how an attacker achieves to the goal.

acyclic graph AG = ( S, S0 , G, A, E, Δ, Φ ) , where:

and a2 will be conducted (with probabilities defined in  ),



S = {si | i = 1,..., N s } is a finite set of state nodes. The

and further make the network state transfer to s2 , s3 and s4

value of each node variable si can be either True or

(with probabilities defined in Φ ).
The existences of an edge between two nodes imply that
there is a causal dependency between their states, signified by
the decomposition at each node. AND-decomposition
signifies that the compromised state of a node implies that all
nodes in its parent set have also been compromised. Similarly,
OR-decomposition signifies that at least one parent node is in
the true state.



False, denoting whether it is in a state that has been
taken over by the attacker;
S0  S is a set of state the attacker initially takes



over (with certain probabilities). Graphically it is the
set of the root nodes of AG;
G  S is a set of attack goals;



A = {ai | i = 1,..., N a } is a finite set of action nodes.

The value of each node variable ai can be either True



In Fig. 5, the initial state is s1 . Then intrusion actions a1

or False, denoting whether an intrusion action has
been conducted by the attacker;
E = ( E1  E2 ) is a finite set of edges which link
nodes together. Here E1  S  A is the set of edges
which denote an action can only be conducted given
that all the prerequisite state are taken over by the
attacker, E2  A  S is the set of edges which denotes
an action may consequently let the attacker take over
some other state. Generally Pre( n) and Con( n ) are
used to denote the prerequisite nodes and consequent
nodes of node n respectively;



 = { : (Pre( ai ), ai )  [0,1]} is the local conditional



probability distribution that an action will be
conducted given that its prerequisite is satisfied.
Φ = { : ( ai , Con( ai ))  [0,1]} is the local conditional
probability distribution that an action will succeed if it

C. Principle of Evidence-Driven Security Assessment
There are many methods to propose schemes to extrapolate
network security state according to the security evidence. And
the probabilistic method is a predominant one. The basic idea
lies in the scheme is as following:
Use a list of parameters in attack graph to delegate the
security state of network. When new evidences come, the
values of the list of parameters will vary, and then new
security state of network is extrapolated.
It is a posterior inference problem. And the evidence-driven
security assessment is as same as the problem. According the
probabilistic method, there are three problems need to be
addressed to measure the security along with evidence. They
are how to calculate Pr( ai ) and Pr( si ) separately, and how to
calculate the posterior probability with evidences Pr( ai | E) .
Based on the previous research [17], these probabilities are
calculated as follows:
Pr( ai ) = 2  B_AV  B_AC  B_AU

(1)

204

IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, Vol. 62, No. 2, May 2016

In the equation, B_AV represents access vector, B_AC
represents access complexity, and B_AU represents
authentication instances.
Pr( si ) = 0.98

Pr( ai | E) = Pr(E | ai )  Pr( ai ) / Pr(E)

(2)
(3)

Pr(E) and Pr( ai ) are the prior unconditional probability

values of the corresponding nodes. Pr(E | ai ) is the
conditional probability of joint occurrence of ai ,...., am given
the states of a j . Since evidence nodes in E are mutually
independent,

Pr(E | ai ) =  i Pr( ai | a j )

and

reach a target in attack graph are below a certain threshold,
and at the same time the cost to deploy attack mitigation
controls is the minimum value in all mitigation plans.
Definition 3: Let M = {mi | i = 1,..., N a } be the attack
mitigation controls for actions A = {ai | i = 1,..., N a } . An
attack mitigation plan is represented by a Boolean
vector T = {ti | i = 1,..., N a } , where ti = True represents mi is
adopted in the plan and ti

= False represents mi is not

adopted in the plan.
Suppose there are p paths for target in attack graph, and T is
the attack mitigation plan. And Threshold is the maximum
value allowed after perform attack mitigation plan. Then
probability of successful attack for i - th path is Pi (T ) . And
the total cost for attack mitigation plan T is Cost i (T ) .
To achieve the goal of attack mitigation plan, the values
must obey the policy:

Pr( ai | a j ) =  i Pr( ai ) .

IV. ATTACK MITIGATION USING SDN CONTROL AND NFV
DEPLOYMENT

A. Mechanism of Attack Mitigation using SDN Control and
NFV Deployment
The mechanism of attack mitigation using SDN control and
NFV deployment is illustrated in Fig. 6.

Pi (T )  Threshold, i = 1, ..., p

(5)

and
Minimize Cost(T )

(6)

This is a constrained optimization problem and many
algorithms can be applied directly to solve constrained
optimization problem [23].
Fig. 6. Mechanism of attack mitigation using SDN control and NFV
deployment. The mechanism is context-aware and dynamic.

Based on the attack graph driven by evidences as
aforementioned, SDN controller respects all the VNFs that
have been registered before and decides attack mitigation plan
for current situation obeyed predefined security policy. The
algorithms for how to decide attack mitigation plan is
discussed in later section. Then, SDN controller gets the
attack mitigation plan and installs the VNF instances into the
selected network nodes. VFN can be realized as binary codes
or interpreted language scripts. After these steps, mobile
network can defend against the threats and reach secure status.
B. Principle of Attack mitigation
Definition 2: Let mi ( pi , costi ) is an attack mitigation

control for action ai . And pi is the factor that decrease the
successful probability of ai . And costi is the cost to deploy
the attack mitigation control. Then:
Pr( a j

| mi ) = Pr( a j )  pi

(4)

The goal of attack mitigation plan is to deploy enough
attack mitigation controls so that all of the probabilities to

V. EVALUATION AND DISCUSSION

In this section, a case is studied to evaluate the proposed
scheme and the practicability analysis for the implementation
of this scheme is discussed. Firstly, experimental setup for
multi-stage attack mitigation is illustrated. In the experiment,
the attacker generates a multi-stage attack penetrating into the
internal smart home networks through a home router that can
be accessed form the Internet and then travels to the
microwave ovens to harm the physical world. Next, attack
graph and mitigation plan decision for attack mitigation are
provided.
A. Experimental Setup for Multi-stage Attack Mitigation
The SDHN model illustrated in Fig. 1 is used for the
evaluation case. The network is divided into three zones. The
access zone includes home router and surveillance camera that
can be accessed from internet directly. The entertainment zone
includes personal computer, smart TV, video system, and etc.
The living zone includes smart washing machine, smart
microwave oven, and etc.
To protect the boundary of the zones, a DMZ tri-homed
firewall is installed. With the firewall, the home router and the
surveillance camera located in the access network are separated
from the entertainment zone. The firewall confirms that users in
Internet cannot access the devices in entertainment zone directly.

S. Luo et al.: A Multi-stage Attack Mitigation Mechanism for Software-defined Home Networks

In order to accommodate the surveillance camera’s transaction,
it is allowed to access the video system in entertainment zone.
And the home router can access the personal computer directly.
To manage the video data, a SQL server is running on the video
system. The living zone is managed by the personal computer.
A smart microwave oven locates in the living zone. It is
dangerous because of its physical harm and is the target for
attack in the case.
TABLE I
NETWORK CONNECTIVITY
From

To

Protocol

Internet
Home router
Internet
Surveillance camera
Surveillance camera
Video system
Personal
Home router
computer
Personal
Video system
computer
Smart microwave
Personal computer
oven

HTTP, IMAP, SMTP
HTTP
SQL
Basic network protocols
Basic network protocols
Basic network protocols

TABLE II
INITIAL LIST OF VULNERABILITIES IN CASE NETWORK
Host
Surveillance
camera
(192.168.1.10)

Home
router
(192.168.1.20)
Video
system
(192.168.1.200)

Personal computer
(192.168.1.100)

Smart microwave
oven
(10.10.1.254)

Vulnerability
IIS
vulnerability
in WebDAV
service
Remote code
execution in
SMTP
Error message
information
leakage
SQL Injection
Heap
corruption in
OpenSSH
Inproper
cookies
handler in
OpenSSH
Remote code
execution in
Linux

CVE#

Type of Attack

CVE 20091535

Remote-2-local
authentication
bypass

CVE 20040840

Remote-2-root

CVE 20083060

Account
information theft

CVE 20085416

Remote-2-root

CVE 20030693

Local-2-root

CVE 20074752

Authentication
bypass

CVE 20150235

Remote-2-root

The network connectivity is illustrated in Table I. CVE
(Common Vulnerabilities & Exposures) database nominates
the common vulnerabilities and exposures which helps share
data between different independent vulnerability databases
and monitoring tools. The list of initial vulnerabilities in the
case network model is listed in Table II.
These vulnerabilities can produce several attack scenarios.
The results of attack are ranging from information leakage to
system compromise. And there exists attack paths that the
attacker can compromise the smart microwave oven from the
Internet.
Also the countermeasures to decrease the exploitation
successful probability of the listed vulnerabilities are listed. In

205

the case, there are seven countermeasures to defend special
vulnerability exploitation. And the effect and cost of the
countermeasures are not identical. Each countermeasure along
with its effect and cost are listed in Table III.
TABLE III
LIST OF COUNTERMEASURES FOR VULNERABILITIES IN CASE NETWORK
Action
a1
a2
a3
a3
a4
a5
a6
a7

CVE#

Control

Effect

Cost

CVE 2004-0840
CVE 2009-1535
CVE 2003-0693
CVE 2003-0693
CVE 2008-5416
CVE 2007-4752
CVE 2015-0235
CVE 2008-3060

C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8

0.4
0.4
0.4
0.25
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.4

10
10
10
40
10
10
10
10

It is necessary to point out that the “Effect” column in Table
III represents that when deploy the countermeasure, the
corresponding exploitation successful probability will
decrease to the level equal to the former probability multiple
the “Effect” value. In addition, the case assumes the IDS
produces an alert that the attacker want compromise the
personal computer on the video system using CVE 2003-0693
exploitation. If without IDS, the features of network
monitored by other devices can also be analyzed to acquire the
capability of the home networks. The analysis result helps
produce an alert. Also, a threshold that all the probability to
achieve compromising the smart microwave oven should be
below is set. The value of the threshold is 0.02. It means the
maximum value of total probabilities of all paths is below 0.02.
Generated Attack Graph
In the initial network state, no security event is detected,
and the static attack graph in the initial state is illustrated in
Fig. 7.
B.

Fig. 7. Attack graph generated from case network. Smart microwave oven
is the attack target.

In Fig. 7, there are eight state nodes

( S1 - S )
8

and seven

action nodes ( a1 - a7 ) . Each state node represents a current
state of the network. And each action node represents
vulnerability exploitation in the initial list of vulnerability in

206

IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, Vol. 62, No. 2, May 2016

unconditional transfer probability between nodes. Also there
is a security event detected.
When the attacker wants perform action 3 to compromise
personal computer on video system, the IDS discovers the
action and alert to the security service. The goal of attack
mitigation is to defend the smart microwave oven. Using the
method aforementioned, the unconditional transfer
probabilities for each edge in static and dynamic environment
are calculated respectively as listed in Table IV.
TABLE IV
UNCONDITIONAL PROBABILITIES OF (P1-P8) IN ATTACK GRAPH
Stage

Pre-evidence
stage
Post-evidence
stage
Stage

Pre-evidence
stage
Post-evidence
stage

P1

P2

P3

P4

P5

P6

P7

P8

0.9
8
0.9
9

0.9
8
0.9
9

0.4
5
0.4
9

0.4
7
0.5
2

0.9
8
0.9
9

0.9
8
0.9
9

0.9
8
0.9
9

0.5
3
0.6
1

P9

P10

P11

P12

P13

P14

P15

0.9
8
1.0
0

0.7
7
0.8
6

0.4
2
0.4
8

0.9
8
0.9
9

0.9
8
0.9
9

0.3
5
0.4
2

0.3
7
0.4
6

mitigation plans except the countermeasures c6 and c8are
illustrated in Fig. 8 with their probabilities and in Fig. 9 with
their cost.
In all of the possible mitigation plans, besides the selected
countermeasure, there are also some other countermeasures
that both the probabilities of the two attack paths are below
the threshold. But the cost of the proposed countermeasure is
the lowest one among them.

0.20

Probabilities of Attack Paths

case network. Each edge labeled with ( P1 - P15 ) represents

Probability of Attack Path 1
Probability of Attack Path 2

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

Countermeasure Index

Fig. 8. Total probabilities of the two attack paths of all the
countermeasures.

C.

is calculated as follows when the attack evidence is observed:
P1total = P1  P4  P7  P10  P12  P14 = 0.182

(7)

120
Total Cost

100

Total Cost

Attack Mitigation Plan Decision
According to the attack graph, there are two paths that the
attacker can compromise the smart microwave oven.
In the first path, the attacker can compromise the home
router, the personal computer and the smart microwave oven
sequentially. The success probability of this attack path P1total

80
60
40
20
0

In the second path, the attacker can compromise the
surveillance camera, the video system, and the personal
computer and the smart microwave oven sequentially. And
the success probability of this attack path P2 total is calculated
as follows when the attack evidence is observed:
P2total = P2  P3  P5  P8  P9  P10  P12  P15 = 0.104 (8)

To mitigate the detected attack, using the constrained
optimization algorithm, the exact attack mitigation plan for
post-evidence stage is generated.
In the result attack mitigation plan, the countermeasures
include C3 and C4. When the countermeasures are applied to
the mobile network, the success probabilities of the two attack
paths decrease to 0.018 and 0.010 separately calculated as
follows. They are all below the threshold defined in previous
section. The total cost of the countermeasure Cost Total is 50.
To verify the algorithm, the entire possible countermeasures
are listed. To simplify the illustration, all the possible

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

Countermeasure Index

Fig. 9. Total cost of all the countermeasures.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper, a multi-stage attack mitigation scheme for
SDHN using SDN and NFV is provided. It extends the classic
SDHN architecture to a comprehensive one that leverages the
advantages of SDN and NFV to mitigate multi-stage attacks,
including global view, central control, programmability, and
instant deployment. In the comprehensive architecture,
security functions are deployed widely in the network and the
features of global view and central control for the security
architecture are provided. By these means, the architecture
provides agile policy and effective response functions. An
evidence-driven security assessment mechanism and
algorithms are proposed to solve the dynamic security
assessment problem. It can measure the current security level
of SDHN based on the threat information. The attack
mitigation problem is approved essentially a constrained

S. Luo et al.: A Multi-stage Attack Mitigation Mechanism for Software-defined Home Networks

optimization problem and attack mitigation mechanism is
provided. The evaluation shows that proposed scheme is
effective for attack mitigation of SDHN.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]
[10]
[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]
[15]

[16]
[17]
[18]

M. Usman, V. Muthukkumarasamy, and X. Wu, “Mobile agent-based
cross-layer anomaly detection in smart home sensor networks using
fuzzy logic,” IEEE Trans. Consumer Electronics, vol. 61, no.2, pp. 197205, May 2015.
J. Wang, Z. Zhang, B. Li, S. Lee, and R.S. Sherratt , “An enhanced fall
detection system for elderly person monitoring using consumer home
networks,” IEEE Trans. Consumer Electronics, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. 23-29,
Feb. 2014.
J. Jo, S. Lee, and J. Kim, “Software-defined home networking devices
for multi-home visual sharing,” IEEE Trans. Consumer Electronics, vol.
60, no. 3, pp. 534-539, Aug. 2014.
Ei, H., and W. V.W.S., “Bandwidth allocation and pricing for SDNenabled home networks,” in Proc. 2015 IEEE International Conference
on Communications, London, UK, pp. 5342-5347, Jun. 2015.
H. Kumar, H. Gharakheili, and V. Sivaraman, “User control of quality of
experience in home networks using SDN,” in Proc. 2013 IEEE
International
Conference
on
Advanced
Networks
and
Telecommuncations Systems, Kattankulathur, Indian, pp. 1-6, Dec. 2013.
L. Costa, N. Almeida, A. Correa, R. Lopes, and M. Zuffo, “Accessible
display design to control home area networks,” IEEE Trans. Consumer
Electronics, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 422-427, May 2013.
N. Komninos, E. Philippou, and A. Pitsillides, “Survey in Smart Grid
and Smart Home Security: Issues, Challenges and Countermeasures,”
IEEE Communication Survey & Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1933-1954,
Fourth Quarter 2014.
N. Liu, J. Zhang, H. Zhang, and W. Liu, “Security Assessment for
Communication Networks of Power Control Systems Using Attack
Graph and MCDM,” IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery, vol. 23, no. 3, pp.
1492–1500, Jun. 2010.
D. Kreutz, F. Ramos, P. Verı´ssimo, E. Rothenberg, S. Azodolmolky,
and S. Uhlig, “Software-defined networking: A comprehensive survey,”
in Proc. of the IEEE, vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 14-76, Jan. 2015.
B. Han, V. Gopalakrishnan, L. Ji, and S. Lee, “Network function
virtualization: challenges and opportunities for innovations,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 90-97, Feb. 2015.
T. Wood, K. Ramakrishnan, J. Hwang, G. Liu, and W. Zhang, “Toward
a software-based network: integrating software defined networking and
network function virtualization,” IEEE Network Magazine, vol. 29, no.
3, pp. 36–41, 2015.
S. Junggab, R. Hussain, H. Kim, and H. Oh, “SC-DVR: a secure cloud
computing based framework for DVR service,” IEEE Trans. Consumer
Electronics, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 368-374, Aug. 2014.
F. Almenares, P. Arias, A. Marin, D. Diaz-Sanchez, and R. Sanchez,
“Overhead of using secure wireless communications in mobile
computing,” IEEE Trans. Consumer Electronics, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 335342, May 2013.
D. He, N. Kumar, and J. Lee, “Secure pseudonym-based near field
communication protocol for the consumer internet of things,” IEEE
Trans. Consumer Electronics, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 56-62, Feb. 2015.
P. Kumar, A. Gurtov, J. Iinatti, M. Ylianttila, and M. Sain, “Lightweight
and secure session-key establishment scheme in smart home
environments,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 254-264, Sep.
2015.
T. Kim, L. Bauer, J. Newsome, A. Perrig, and J. Walker, “Access right
assignment mechanisms for secure home networks,” Journal of
Communications and Networks, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 175-186, Apr. 2011.
N. Idika, and B. Bhargava, “Extending attack graph-based
securitymetrics and aggregating their application,” IEEE Trans.
Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 75-85, Jan. 2012.
N. Poolsappasit, R. Dewri, and I. Ray, “Dynamic security risk
management using Bayesian attack graphs,” IEEE Trans. Dependable
and Secure Computing, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1545-5971, Jan. 2012.

207

[19] C. Chung, P. Khatkar, T. Xing, J. Lee, and D. Huang, “NICE: network
intrusion detection and countermeasure selection in virtual network
systems,” IEEE Trans. Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 10, no.
4, pp. 198-211, Jul. 2013.
[20] P. Jokar, H. Nicanfar, V. C. M. Leung, “Specification-based Intrusion
Detection for home area networks in smart grids,” in Proc. of 2011 IEEE
International Conference on Smart Grid Communications
(SmartGridComm), Brussels, Belgium, pp. 208-213, 2011.
[21] M. Usman, V. Muthukkumarasamy, X. W. Wu, “Mobile agent-based
cross-layer anomaly detection in smart home sensor networks using
fuzzy logic,” IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, vol. 61, no. 2,
pp. 197-205, 2015.
[22] S. Myers, S. Stamm, “Practice & prevention of home-router mid-stream
injection attacks,” in Proc. of eCrime Researchers Summit, Atlanta,
USA, pp. 1-14, 2008.
[23] Y. Zhou, and J. He, “A runtime analysis of evolutionary algorithms for
constrained optimization problems,” IEEE Trans. Evolutionary
Computation, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 608-619, Oct. 2007.
BIOGRAPHIES
Shibo Luo was born in Hunan, China, in 1977. He is
currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China. He participates in
many national projects, such as National Natural Science
Foundation of China, National “973” Planning of the
Ministry of Science and Technology, China, etc. His
research interests include SDN network security, network
service composition, etc.
Jun Wu (S’08-M’12) was born in Hunan, China, in 1979.
He is an Associate Professor of Electronic Information
and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, China. He received his Ph.D. Degree in
Information and Telecommunication Studies at Waseda
University, Japan. He has been a Guest Editor for the
IEEE Sensors Journal and a TPC Member of several
international conferences including WINCON 2011,
GLOBECOM 2015, etc. He is a member of IEEE. His research interests
include the advanced computation and communications techniques of smart
sensors, wireless communication systems, industrial control systems, wireless
sensor networks, smart grids, etc.
Jianhua Li was born in Jiangxi, China, in 1965. He is a
professor/Ph.D. supervisor and the dean of School of
Information Security Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China. He received his BS, MS
and Ph.D. degrees from Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
in 1986, 1991 and 1998, respectively. He was the chief
expert in the information security committee experts of
National High Technology Research and Development
Program of China (863 Program) of China. His research
interests include information security, signal process, computer network
communication, etc.
Longhua Guo was born in Shanxi, China, in 1991. He
received the B.S. degree in electronic information
engineering from Tianjin University, Tianjin, China, in
2013 and is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. He
participates in many national projects, such as National
Natural Science Foundation of China, National “973”
Planning of the Ministry of Science and Technology,
China, etc. His research interests include sensor network
security, social network analysis, etc.

